The Project Gutenberg eBook, The History of the Lives and Bloody Exploits
of the Most Noted Pirates; Their Trials and Executions, by Ezra Baldwin
Strong


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The History of the Lives and Bloody Exploits of the Most Noted Pirates; Their Trials and Executions
       Including a Correct Account of the Late Piracies Committed in the West-Indies, and the Expedition of Commodore Porter; also, Those Committed on the Brig Mexican, Who Were Tried and Executed at Boston, in 1835


Author: Ezra Baldwin Strong



Release Date: June 21, 2017  [eBook #54951]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE LIVES AND
BLOODY EXPLOITS OF THE MOST NOTED PIRATES; THEIR TRIALS AND EXECUTIONS***


E-text prepared by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 54951-h.htm or 54951-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54951/54951-h/54951-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54951/54951-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/historyoflivesbl00stro


      Some characters might not display properly in this UTF-8
      text file (e.g., empty squares). If so, the reader should
      consult the html version or the original page images noted
      above.


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE.]


                                  THE
                                HISTORY
                                 OF THE
                       LIVES AND BLOODY EXPLOITS
                                 OF THE
                               MOST NOTED
                                PIRATES;
                                 THEIR
                         Trials and Executions.
                   INCLUDING A CORRECT ACCOUNT OF THE
                             LATE PIRACIES
 COMMITTED IN THE WEST-INDIES, AND THE EXPEDITION OF COMMODORE PORTER;
 ALSO, THOSE COMMITTED ON THE BRIG MEXICAN, WHO WERE TRIED AND EXECUTED
                          AT BOSTON, IN 1835.


           “Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci”—HOR.

           Embellished with Engravings from Original Designs.


[Illustration: The Ship Speaker taken by the Pirates.—Page 112.]






                               HARTFORD:
                    PUBLISHED BY SILAS ANDRUS & SON

Entered according to act of Congress in the year 1836, by Ezra Strong,
in the Clerk’s office of the State of Connecticut.

Stereotyped by Shepard, Oliver and Company, Boston.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS


 THE HISTORY OF THE PIRATES.
   CAPTAIN MISSON.
   CAPTAIN JOHN BOWEN.
   CAPTAIN ROBERT KIDD.
   CAPTAIN TEW.
   CAPTAIN JOHN HALSEY.
   CAPTAIN THOMAS WHITE.
   CAPTAIN CONDENT.
   CAPTAIN BELLAMY.
   CAPTAIN WILLIAM FLY.
   CAPTAIN THOMAS HOWARD.
   CAPTAIN LEWIS.
   CAPTAIN JOHN CORNELIUS.
   CAPTAIN DAVID WILLIAMS.
   CAPTAIN SAMUEL BURGESS.
   CAPTAIN NATHANIEL NORTH.
   AN ACCOUNT
     A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE PRISONERS EXECUTED.
 A CORRECT ACCOUNT OF THE LATE PIRACIES COMMITTED IN THE WEST-INDIES;
    AND THE EXPEDITION OF COMMODORE PORTER.
   MUTINY ON BOARD THE BRITISH SHIP KATE.
   LIST OF ATROCIOUS PIRACIES AND BARBARITIES.
   U. S. BRIG SPARK.
   PIRACY.
   BRIG DOVER.
   PIRATES CAPTURED.
   LIEUT. ALLEN’S VICTORY AND DEATH.
   PIRATES ENTRAPPED.
   SAILING OF COMMODORE PORTER.
   EXECUTION OF THE PIRATES.
   PIRATES CAPTURED.
   LAFITTE, THE NOTED PIRATE, KILLED.
   BATTLE WITH THE PIRATES.
   CAPTURE OF A PIRATICAL STATION IN CUBA.
   PIRATES TAKEN AND EXECUTED.
   CHARLES GIBBS.
   PIRACIES ON THE BRIG MEXICAN.




                                  THE
                                HISTORY
                                   OF
                              THE PIRATES.


                            CAPTAIN MISSON.

Captain Misson was born in Provence, of an ancient family. His father
was master of a plentiful fortune; but having a great number of
children, our rover had but little hopes of other fortune than what he
could carve out for himself with his sword. His parents took care to
give him an education equal to his birth, and upon the completion of it
would have put him into the musketeers; but as he was of a roving
temper, and much affected with the accounts he had read in books of
travels, he chose the sea as a life which abounds with more variety, and
would afford him an opportunity to gratify his curiosity, by the change
of countries. Having made this choice, his father, with letters of
recommendation, and every thing fitting for him, sent him to volunteer
on board the Victoire, commanded by Monsieur Fourbin, his relation. He
was received on board with all possible regard by the Captain, whose
ship was at Marseilles, and was ordered to cruise soon after Misson’s
arrival. Nothing could be more agreeable to the inclinations of our
volunteer than this cruise, which made him acquainted with the most
noted ports in the Mediterranean, and gave him a great insight into the
practical part of navigation. He grew fond of this life, and was
resolved to be a complete sailor, which made him always one of the first
on a yard arm, either to hand or reef, and very inquisitive in the
different methods of working a ship: his discourse was turned on no
other subject, and he would often get the boatswain and carpenter to
teach him in their cabins the constituent parts of a ship’s hull, and
how to rig her, which he generously paid them for; and though he spent a
great part of his time with these two officers, yet he behaved himself
with such prudence that they never attempted any familiarity, and always
paid the respect due to his family. The ship being at Naples, he
obtained leave of his captain to go to Rome, which he had a great desire
to visit. Hence we may date his misfortunes; for, remarking the
licentious lives of the clergy, (so different from the regularity
observed among the French ecclesiastics,) the luxury of the Papal Court,
and that nothing but hulls of religion were to be found in the
metropolis of the christian church, he began to figure to himself that
all religion was no more than a curb upon the minds of the weaker, which
the wiser sort yielded to, in appearance only. These sentiments, so
disadvantageous to religion and himself, were strongly riveted by
accidentally becoming acquainted with a lewd priest, who was at his
arrival (by mere chance) his confessor, and after that his procurer and
companion, for he kept him company to his death.

[Illustration: The Victory engages with two Salle-men.       Page 7.]

Misson at length became so much attached to this man, that he advised
him to go with him as volunteer, and offered him money to clothe him:
the priest leaped at the proposal, and a letter coming to Misson from
his captain, that he was going to Leghorn, and left it to him either to
come to Naples, or go by land; he chose the latter, and the Dominican,
whom he furnished with money, clothing himself very cavalierly, threw
off his habit, and preceded him two days, staying at Pisa for Misson;
from whence they went together to Leghorn, where they found the
Victoire, and signior Caraccioli, recommended by his friend, was
received on board. Two days after they weighed from hence, and after a
week’s cruise fell in with two Sallee-men, the one of twenty, the other
of twenty-four guns; the Victoire had but thirty mounted, though she had
ports for forty. The engagement was long and bloody, for the Sallee-men
hoped to carry the Victoire; and, on the contrary, Capt. Fourbin, so far
from having any thoughts of being taken, he was resolutely bent to make
prize of his enemies, or sink his ship. One of the Sallee-men was
commanded by a Spanish renegade, (though he had only the title of a
lieutenant) for the captain was a young man who knew little of marine
affairs.

This ship was called the Lion; and he attempted, more than once, to
board the Victoire; but by a shot betwixt wind and water, he was obliged
to sheer off, and running his guns, &c. on one side, to bring her on the
careen to stop his leak; this being done with too much precipitation,
she overset, and every soul was lost. His comrade, seeing this disaster,
threw out all his small sails, endeavoured to get off, but the Victoire
wronged her, and obliged her to renew the fight, which she did with
great obstinacy, and made Monsieur Fourbin despair of carrying her if he
did not board; he made preparations accordingly. Signior Caraccioli and
Misson were the two first on board when the command was given; but they
and their followers were beat back by the despair of the Sallee-men; the
former received a shot in his thigh, and was carried down to the
surgeon. The Victoire laid her on board the second time, and the
Sallee-men defended their decks with such resolution, that they were
covered with their own, and the dead bodies of their enemies. Misson
seeing one of them jump down the main hatch with a lighted match,
suspecting his design, resolutely leaped after him, and reaching him
with his sabre, laid him dead the moment he was going to set fire to the
powder. The Victoire pouring in more men, the Mahometans quitted the
decks, finding resistance vain, and fled for shelter to the cook-room,
steerage, and cabins, and some ran between decks. The French gave them
quarters, and put the prisoners on board the Victoire, the prize
yielding nothing worth mention, except liberty to about fifteen
Christian slaves; she was carried into and sold with the prisoners at
Leghorn. The Turks lost a great many men; the French not less than 35 in
boarding, for they lost very few by the great shot, the Sallee-men
firing mostly at the masts and rigging, hoping by disabling to carry
her. The limited time of their cruise being out, the Victoire returned
to Marseilles, from whence Misson taking his companion, went to visit
his parents, to whom the captain sent a very advantageous character,
both of his courage and conduct. He was about a month at home when his
captain wrote to him, that his ship was ordered to Rochelle, from whence
he was to sail for the West-Indies with some merchantmen. This was very
agreeable to Misson and signior Caraccioli, who immediately set out for
Marseilles. This town is well fortified, has four parish churches, and
the number of inhabitants is computed to be about 120,000; the harbour
is esteemed the safest in the Mediterranean, and is the common station
for the French gallies.

Leaving this place, they steered for Rochelle, where the Victoire was
docked, the merchant ships not being near ready. Misson, who did not
care to pass so long a time in idleness, proposed to his comrade the
taking a cruise on board the Triumph, which was going into the English
channel; and the Italian readily consented to it.

Between the Isle of Guernsey and the Start Point, they met with the
Mayflower, Capt. Balladine, commander, a merchant ship of 18 guns,
richly laden, and coming from Jamaica. The captain of the English made a
gallant resistance, and fought his ship so long, that the French could
not carry her into harbour, wherefore they took the money, and what was
most valuable, out of her; and finding she made more water than the
pumps could free, quitted, and saw her go down in less than four hours
after. Monsieur Le Blanc, the French captain, received Capt. Balladine
very civilly, and would not suffer either him or his men to be stripped,
saying, _None but cowards ought to be treated after that manner; that
brave men ought to treat such, though their enemies, as brothers; and
that to use a gallant man (who does his duty) ill, speaks a revenge
which cannot proceed but from a coward soul_. He ordered that the
prisoners should have their chests; and when some of his men seemed to
mutter, he bade them remember the grandeur of the monarch they served;
that they were neither pirates nor privateers; and as brave men, they
ought to show their enemies an example they would willingly have
followed, and use their prisoners as they wished to be used.

They then run up the English channel as high as Beachy Head, and, in
returning, fell in with three fifty gun ships; which gave chase to the
Triumph; but as she was an excellent sailor, she run them out of sight
in seven glasses, and made the best of her way for the Land’s-End. They
here cruised eight days, then doubling Cape Cornwall, ran up the Bristol
channel, near as far as Nash Point, and intercepted a small ship from
Barbadoes, and stretching away to the northward, gave chase to a ship
they saw in the evening, but lost her in the night. The Triumph then
stood towards Milford, and spying a sail, endeavoured to cut her off the
land, but found it impossible; for she got into the haven, though they
came up with her very fast, and she had surely been taken had the chase
been any thing longer.

Capt. Balladine, who took the glass, said it was the Port Royal, a
Bristol ship, which left Jamaica in company with him and the Charles.
They now returned to their own coast, and sold their prize at Brest,
where, at his desire, they left Capt. Balladine, and Monsieur Le Blanc
made him a present of a purse with 40 _louis_ for his support. His crew
were also left here.

At the entrance into this harbour the Triumph struck upon a rock, but
received no damage. This entrance, called Gonlet, is very dangerous on
account of the number of rocks which lie on each side under water,
though the harbour is certainly the best in France. The mouth of the
harbour is defended by a strong castle; the town is well fortified, and
has a citadel for its farther defence, which is of considerable
strength. In 1694 the English attempted a descent, but did not find
their market, for they were beat off with the loss of their general, and
a great many men. From hence the Triumph returned to Rochelle, and in a
month after, our volunteers, who went on board the Victoire, took their
departure for Martinico and Guadaloupe. They met with nothing in their
voyage thither worth noting. I shall only observe, that signior
Caraccioli, who was as ambitious as he was irreligious, had, by this
time, made a perfect deist of Misson, and thereby convinced him, that
all religion was no other than human policy. But his arguments on this
head are too long, and too dangerous to translate; and as they are
worked up with great subtlety, they may be pernicious to weak men, who
cannot discover their fallacy, or who, finding them agreeable to their
inclinations, would be glad to shake off the yoke of the christian
religion, which galls and curbs their passions, and would not give
themselves the trouble to examine them to the bottom, but give it to
what pleases, glad of finding some excuse to their consciences.

As he had privately held these discourses among the crew, he had gained
a number of proselytes, who looked upon him as a new prophet risen up to
reform the abuses in religion; and a great number being Rochellers, and,
as yet, tainted with Calvanism, his doctrine was the more readily
embraced. When he had experienced the affects of his religious
arguments, he fell upon government, and showed, that every man was born
free, and had as much right to what would support him, as to the air he
respired. A contrary way of arguing would be accusing the deity with
cruelty and injustice, for he brought into the world no man to pass a
life of penury, and to miserably want a necessary support; that the vast
difference between man and man, one wallowing in luxury, and the other
in the most pinching necessity, was owing only to avarice and ambition
on the one hand, and a pusillanimous subjection on the other; that at
first no other than a natural was known a paternal government, every
father was the head, the prince and monarch of his family, and obedience
to such was both just and easy, for a father had compassionate
tenderness for his children; but ambition creeping in by degrees, the
stronger family set upon and enslaved the weaker; and this additional
strength over-run a third, by every conquest gathering force to make
others, and this was the first foundation of monarchy. Pride increasing
with power, man usurped the prerogative of God, over his creatures, that
of depriving them of life, which was a privilege no one had over his
own; for as he did not come into the world by his own election, he ought
to stay the determined time of his creator; that indeed, death given in
war, was by the law of nature allowable, because it is for the
preservation of our own lives; but no crime ought to be thus punished,
nor indeed any war undertaken, but in defence of our natural right,
which is such a share of earth as is necessary for our support.

[Illustration: Engagement between the Victoire and Winchelsea.—The
Winchelsea blew up.       Page 12.]

These topics he often declaimed on, and very often advised with Misson
about the setting up for themselves; he was as ambitious as the other,
and as resolute. Caraccioli and Misson were by this, expert mariners,
and very capable of managing a ship; Caraccioli had sounded a great many
of the men on this subject, and found them very inclinable to listen to
him. An accident happened which gave Caraccioli a fair opportunity to
put his designs in execution, and he laid hold of it. They went off
Martinico on a cruise, and met with the Winchelsea, an English man of
war of 40 guns, commanded by Capt. Jones; they made for each other, and
a very smart engagement followed; the first broadside killed the
captain, second captain, and the three lieutenants, on board the
Victoire, and left only the master, who would have struck, but Misson
took up the sword, ordered Caraccioli to act as lieutenant, and
encouraging the men fought the ship six glasses, when by some accident
the Winchelsea blew up, and not a man was saved but Lieut. Franklin,
whom the French boats took up, and he died in two days. None ever knew
before this manuscript fell into my hands, how the Winchelsea was lost;
for her head being driven ashore at Antigua, and a great storm having
happened a few days before it was found, it was concluded, that she
foundered in that storm. After this engagement, Caraccioli came to
Misson and saluted him captain, and desired to know if he would choose a
momentary or a lasting command, that he must now determine, for at his
return to Martinico it would be too late; and he might depend upon the
ship he fought and saved being given to another, and they would think
him well rewarded if made a lieutenant which piece of justice he
doubted; that he had his fortune in his hands, which he might either
keep or let go; if he made choice of the latter, he must never again
expect she would court him to accept her favours; that he ought to set
before his eyes his circumstances, as a younger brother of a good
family, but nothing to support his character; and the many years he must
serve at the expense of his blood before he could make any figure in the
world, and consider the wide difference between the commanding and being
commanded; that he might with the ship he had under foot, and the brave
fellows under command, bid defiance to the power of Europe, enjoy every
thing he wished, reign sovereign of the Southern Seas, and lawfully make
war on all the world, since it would deprive him of that liberty to
which he had a right by the laws of nature, that he might in time,
become as great as Alexander was to the Persians: and by increasing his
forces by captures, he would every day strengthen the justice of his
cause, for who has power is always in the right. That Harry the fourth
and Harry the seventh, attempted and succeeded in their enterprises on
the crown of England, yet their forces did not equal his. Mahomet with a
few camel drivers, founded the Ottoman empire; and Darius, with no more
than six or seven companions, got possession of that of Persia.

In a word, he said so much that Misson resolved to follow his advice,
and calling up all hands, he told them, “That a great number of them had
resolved with him upon a life of liberty, and had done him the honor to
create him chief; that he designed to force no man, and be guilty of
that injustice he blamed in others; therefore, if any were averse to the
following his fortune, which he promised should be the same to all, he
desired they would declare themselves, and he would set them ashore,
whence they might return with conveniency.” Having made an end, they one
and all cried, “_Vive le Captain Misson et son Lieutenant le savant
Caraccioli_“—_God bless Captain Misson and his learned Lieutenant
Caraccioli_. Misson thanked them for the honor they conferred upon him,
and promised he would use the power they gave for the public good only,
and hoped as they had the bravery to assert their liberty, they would be
as unanimous in the preservation of it, and stand by him in what should
be found expedient for the good of all; that he was their friend and
companion, and should never exert his power, or think himself other than
their comrade, but when the necessity of affairs should oblige him.

They shouted a second time, _Vive le Capitain_: he, after this, desired
they would choose their subaltern officers, and give them power to
consult and conclude upon what might be for the common interest, and
bind themselves down by an oath to agree to what such officers and he
should determine; this they readily gave in to. The schoolmaster they
chose for second lieutenant, Jean Besace they nominated for third, and
the boatswain, and a quarter master, named Mathieu le Tondu, with the
gunner they desired might be their representatives in council. The
choice was approved, and that every thing might pass methodically, and
with general approbation, they were called into the great cabin, and the
question put, _What course they should steer?_ The captain proposed the
Spanish coast as the most probable to afford them rich prizes. This was
agreed upon by all. The boatswain then asked what colours they should
fight under, and advised black as the most terrifying, but Caraccioli
objected, “that they were no pirates, but men who were resolved to
assert that liberty which God and nature gave them, and own no
subjection to any, farther than was for the common good of all: that
indeed obedience to governors was necessary, when they knew and acted up
to the duty of their function; were vigilant guardians of the people’s
rights and liberties; saw that justice was equally distributed; were
barriers against the rich and powerful, when they attempted to oppress
the weaker; when they suffered none on the one hand to grow immensely
rich, either by his own or his ancestor’s encroachments: nor on the
other, to be wretchedly miserable, either by falling, into the hands of
villains, unmerciful creditors, or other misfortunes; while he had eyes
impartial, and allowed nothing but merit to distinguish between man and
man; and instead of being a burthen to the people by his luxurious life,
he was by his care for, and protection of them, a real father, and in
everything acted with the equal and impartial justice of a parent: but
when a governor, who is the minister of the people, thinks himself
raised to this dignity, that he may spend his days in pomp and luxury,
looking upon his subjects as so many slaves, created for his use and
pleasure, and therefore leaves them and their affairs to the
immeasurable avarice and tyranny of some one whom he has chosen for his
favourite; when nothing but oppression, poverty and all the miseries of
life flow from such an administration; that he lavishes away the lives
and fortunes of the people, either to gratify his ambition, or to
support the cause of some neighbouring prince, that he may in return,
strengthen his hands should his people exert themselves in defence of
their native rights; or should he run into unnecessary wars, by the rash
and thoughtless councils of his favourite, and not able to make head
against the enemy he has rashly or wantonly brought upon his hands, and
buy a peace (which is the present case of France, as every one knows, by
supporting King James, and afterwards proclaiming his son) and drain the
subject; should the people’s trade be wilfully neglected, for private
interests, and while their ships of war lie idle in their harbours,
suffer their vessels to be taken; and the enemy not only intercepts all
commerce, but insults their coasts: it speaks a generous and great soul
to shake off the yoke; and if we cannot redress our wrongs, withdraw
from sharing the miseries which meaner spirits submit to, and scorn to
yield to the tyranny. Such men as we, and, if the world, as experience
may convince us it will, makes war upon us, the law of nature empowers
us not only to be on the defensive, but also on the offensive part. As
we then do not proceed upon the same ground with pirates, who are men of
dissolute lives and no principles, let us scorn to take their colours;
ours is a brave, a just, an innocent, and a noble cause; the cause of
liberty. I therefore advise a white ensign, with liberty painted in the
fly, and if you like the motto, “_a Deo a libertate_,” for God and
liberty, as an emblem of our uprightness and resolution.”

The cabin door was left open, and the bulk-head, which was of canvass,
rolled up: the steerage being full of men, who lent an attentive ear,
they cried, “_Liberty, Liberty; we are free men: Vive the brave Capt.
Misson and the noble Lieut. Caraccioli!_” This short council breaking
up, every thing belonging to the deceased captain, and the other
officers, and men lost in the engagement, was brought upon deck and
overhauled; the money ordered to be put into a chest, and the carpenter
to clap on a padlock, and give a key to every one of the council; Misson
telling them, all should be in common, and the particular avarice of no
one should defraud the public.

When the plate Monsieur Fourbin had, was going to the chest, the men
unanimously cried out “avast! keep that out for the captain’s use, as a
present from his officers and foremast men.” Misson thanked them, the
plate was returned to the great cabin, and the chest secured according
to orders: Misson then ordered his lieutenants and other officers to
examine who among the men, were in most want of clothes, and to
distribute those of the dead men impartially, which was done with the
general consent and applause of the whole crew. All but the wounded
being upon deck, Misson from the barricade, spoke to the following
purpose, “That since they had unanimously resolved to seize upon and
defend their liberty, which ambitious men had usurped, and that this
could not be esteemed by impartial judges other than a just and brave
resolution, he was under an obligation to recommend to them a brotherly
love to each other; the banishment of all private piques and grudges,
and a strict agreement and harmony among themselves; that in throwing
off the yoke of tyranny, of which the action spoke an abhorrence, he
hoped none would follow the example of tyrants, and turn his back upon
justice; for when equity was trodden under foot, misery, confusion, and
mutual distrust naturally followed.” He also advised them to remember
there was a Supreme, the adoration of whom, reason and gratitude
prompted us to, and our own interest would engage us (as it is best to
be of the sure side, and after-life was allowed possible) to conciliate:
that he was satisfied men who were born and bred in slavery, by which
their spirits were broke, and were incapable of so generous a way of
thinking, who, ignorant of their birth-right, and the sweets of liberty
dance to the music of their chains, which was, indeed the greater part
of the inhabitants of the globe, would brand this generous crew with the
invidious name of pirates, and think it meritorious to be instrumental
in their destruction. Self-preservation, therefore, and not a cruel
disposition, obliged him to declare war against all such as should
refuse him the entry of their ports, and against all, who should not
immediately surrender and give up what their necessities required; but
in a more particular manner against all European ships and vessels, as
concluded implacable enemies. _And I do now_, said he, _declare such
war, and, at the same time, recommend to you, my comrades, a humane and
generous behaviour, towards your prisoners; which will appear by so much
more the effects of a noble soul, as we are satisfied we should not meet
the same treatment should our ill fortune, or more properly our
disunion, or want of courage, give us up to their mercy_.

After this, he required a muster should be made, and there were able
hands two hundred, and thirty-five sick and wounded. As they were
mustered, they were sworn. After affairs were thus settled, they shaped
their course for the Spanish West-Indies, but resolved in the way, to
take a week or ten days’ cruise in the windward passage from Jamaica,
because most merchantmen, which were good sailers, and did not stay for
convoy, took this as the shorter cut for England.

Off St. Christopher’s they took an English sloop becalmed, with their
boats. They took out of her a couple of puncheons of rum, and half a
dozen hogsheads of sugar. She was a New-England sloop, bound for Boston,
and without offering the least violence to the men, or stripping them,
they let her go. The master of the sloop was Thomas Butler, who owned he
never met with so candid an enemy as the French man of war, which took
him the day he left St. Christophers. They met with no other booty in
their way, till they came upon their station, when after three days,
they saw a sloop which had the impudence to give them chase. Capt.
Misson asked what could be the meaning of the sloop standing for them?
One of the men who was acquainted with the West-Indies, told him, it was
a Jamaica privateer, and he should not wonder, if he clapped him aboard.
“I am,” said he, “no stranger to their way of working, and this
despicable fellow, as those who don’t know a Jamaica privateer may think
him, it is ten to one will give you some trouble. It now grows towards
evening, and you’ll find as soon as he has discovered your force, he’ll
keep out of the reach of your guns till the 12 o’clock watch is changed
at night, and he’ll then attempt to clap you aboard, with hopes to carry
you in the hurry: wherefore, captain, if you will give me leave to
advise you, let every man have his small arms; and at 12, let the bell
ring as usual, and rather more noise than ordinary be made, as if the
one watch was turning in, and the other out, in a confusion and hurry,
and I’ll engage he will venture to enter his men.” The fellow’s advice
was approved and resolved upon, and the sloop worked as he said she
would; for upon coming near enough to make out distinctly the force of
the Victoire, on her throwing out French colours, she, the sloop,
clapped upon a wind, and the Victoire gave chase, but without hopes of
gaining upon her; she went so well to windward, that she could spare the
ship some points in her sheet, and yet wrong her: at dusk of the
evening, the French had lost sight of her, but about 11 at night, they
saw her hankering up on their weather bow, which confirmed the sailor’s
opinion, that she would attempt to board them, as she did at the
pretended change of the watch; there being little or no wind, she lashed
to the bowsprit of the Victoire, and entered her men, who were very
quietly taken, as they entered, and tumbled down the fore-hatch where
they were received by others, and bound without noise. Not one of the
privateersmen was killed, few hurt, and only one Frenchman wounded. The
Victoire, seeing the better part of the sloop’s men secured, they
boarded in their turn, when the privateersmen, suspecting some
stratagem, were endeavouring to cut their lashing and get off. Thus the
Englishmen caught a Tartar. The prisoners being all secured, the captain
charged his men not to discover, through a desire of augmenting their
number, the account they were upon.

The next morning Monsieur Misson called for the captain of the
privateer, and told him, he could not but allow him a brave fellow, to
venture upon a ship of his countenance, and for that reason he should
meet treatment which men of his profession seldom afforded the prisoners
they made. He asked him how long he had been out, what was his name, and
what he had on board? He answered he was but just come out, that he was
the first sail he had met with, and should have thought himself
altogether as lucky not to have spoke with him; that his name was Harry
Ramsey, and what he had on board were rags, powder, ball, and some few
half ankers of rum. Ramsey was ordered into the gun-room, and a council
was held in the public manner aforesaid, the bulk-head of the great
cabin being rolled up. On their conclusion, the captain of the privateer
was called in again, when Capt. Misson told him, he would return him his
sloop, and restore him and his men to their liberty, without stripping
or plundering them of any thing, but what prudence obliged him to, their
ammunition and small arms, if he would give him his word and honour, and
his men take an oath, not to go out on the privateer account in six
months after they left him: that he did not design to continue on that
station above a week longer, at the expiration of which time, he would
let them go.

Ramsay, who had a new sloop, did not expect this favour which he thanked
him for, and promised punctually to comply with the injunction, which
his men as readily swore to, though they had no design to keep the oath.
The time being expired, he and his men were put on board their own
sloop. At going over the ship’s side, Ramsay begged Monsieur Misson
would allow him powder for a salute, by way of thanks; but he answered
him, the ceremony was needless, and he expected no other return than
that of keeping his word, which indeed Ramsay did. Some of his men had
found it more to their advantage to have been as religious.

At parting Ramsey gave the ship three cheers, and Misson had the
complaisance to return one, which Ramsay answering with three more, made
the best of his way for Jamaica, and at the east end of the island met
with the Diana, who, upon advice, turned back.

The Victoire steered for Carthagena, off which port they cruised some
days, but meeting with nothing in those seas, they made for Porto Bello;
in their way they met with two Dutch traders, who had letters-of-marque,
and were just come upon the coast, the one had 20, the other 24 guns;
Misson engaged them, and they defended themselves with a great deal of
resolution and gallantry; and as they were manned apeak, he durst not
venture to board either of them, for fear of being at the same time
boarded by the other. His weight of metal gave him a great advantage
over the Dutch, though they were two to one; besides, their business, as
they had cargoes, was to get off, if possible, wherefore they made a
running fight, though they took care to stick close to one another.

They maintained the fight for above six hours, when Misson, enraged at
this obstinacy, and fearing, if by accident they should bring a mast, or
top-mast by the board, they would get from him, he was resolved to sink
the larger ship of the two, and accordingly ordered his men to bring all
their guns to bear a midship, then running close along side of him, to
raise their metal, his orders being punctually obeyed, he poured in a
broadside, which opened such a gap in the Dutch ship that she went
directly to the bottom, and every man perished.

He then manned his bowsprit, brought his sprit sail yard fore and aft,
and resolved to board the other, which the Dutch perceiving, and
terrified with the unhappy fate of their comrade, thought a farther
resistance vain, and immediately struck. Misson gave them good quarters,
though he was enraged at the loss of thirteen men killed outright,
beside nine wounded, of which six died. They found on board a great
quantity of gold and silver lace, brocade silks, silk stockings, bales
of broadcloth, baizes of all colours, and osnaburgs.

A consultation being held, it was resolved Capt. Misson should take the
name of Fourbin, and returning to Carthagena, dispose of his prize, and
set his prisoners ashore. Accordingly they plied to the eastward, and
came to an anchor between Boca Chicca fort, and the town, for they did
not think it expedient to enter the harbour. The barge was manned, and
Caraccioli, with the name of D’Aubigny, the first lieutenant, who was
killed in the engagement with the Winchelsea, and his commission in his
pocket, went ashore with a letter to the governor, signed Fourbin, whose
character, for fear of the worst was exactly counterfeited. The purport
of his letter was, that having discretionary orders to cruise for three
months, and hearing the English infested his coast he was come in search
of them, and had met two Dutchmen, one of which he had sunk, the other
he made prize of. That his limited time being near expired, he should be
obliged to his excellency, if he would send on board him such merchants
as were willing to take the ship and cargo off his hands, of which he
had sent the Dutch invoice. Don Joseph de la Zerda, the then governor,
received the lieutenant (who sent back the barge at landing) very
civilly, and agreed to take the prisoners ashore, and do every thing
that was required of him; and ordering fresh provisions and vegetables
to be got ready as a present for the captain, he sent for some
merchants, who were very ready to go on board, and agree for the ship
and goods; which they did, for fifty-two thousand pieces of eight. The
next day the prisoners were set ashore; a rich piece of brocade which
was reserved, sent to the governor for a present, a quantity of fresh
provision bought and brought on board, the money paid by the merchants,
the ship and goods delivered, and the Victoire, at the dawn of the
following day, got under sail. It may be wondered how such despatch
could be made, but the reader must take notice, these goods were sold by
the Dutch invoice, which the merchant of the prize affirmed was genuine.
I shall observe, by the by, that the Victoire was the French man of war
which Admiral Wager sent the Kingston in search of, and being afterwards
falsely informed, that she was joined by another of 70 guns, and that
they cruised together between the Capes, ordered the Severn up to
windward, to assist the Kingston, which had like to have proved very
fatal; for these two English men of war, commanded by Capt. Trevor and
Capt. Pudnor, meeting in the night, had prepared to engage, each taking
the other for the enemy. The Kingston’s men not having a good look-out
which must be attributed to the negligence of the officer of the watch,
did not see the Severn till she was just upon them; but by good luck, to
leeward, and plying up, with all the sail she could crowd, and a clear
ship. This put the Kingston in such confusion, that when the Severn
hailed, no answer was returned for none heard her. She was got under the
Kingston’s stern, and Capt. Pudnor ordered to hail for the third and
last time, and if no answer was returned, to give her a broadside. The
noise on board the Kingston was now a little ceased, and Capt. Trevor,
who was on the poop with a speaking trumpet, to hail the Severn, by good
luck heard her hail him, and answering the Kingston, and asking the name
of the other ship, prevented the damage.

They cruised together some time, and meeting nothing which answered
their information, returned to Jamaica, as I shall to my subject,
begging pardon for this, as I thought, necessary digression.

Don Juan de la Zerda told the captain in a letter, that the St. Joseph,
a galleon of 70 guns, was then lying at Porto Bello, and should be glad
if he could keep her company till she was off the coast. That she would
sail in eight or ten days for the Havana; and that, if his time would
permit him, he would send an advice-boat. That she had on board the
value of 800,000 pieces of eight in silver, and bar gold. Misson
returned answer, that he believed he should be excused if he stretched
his orders, for a few days; and that he would cruise off the Isle of
Pearls, and Cape Gratias a Dios, and give for signal to the galleon, his
spreading a white ensign in his fore-top-mast shrouds, the cluing up his
fore-sail, and the firing one gun to windward, and two to leeward, which
he should answer by hoisting his fore-top-sail three times, and the
firing as many guns to leeward. Don Joseph, extremely pleased with this
complaisance, sent a boat express to advise the St. Joseph, but she was
already sailed two days, contrary to the governor of Carthagena’s
expectation, and this advice Capt. Misson had from the boat, which
returning with an answer, saw the Victoire in the offing, and spoke to
her. It was then resolved to follow the St. Joseph, and accordingly they
steered for the Havanna, but by what accident they did not overtake her
is unknown.

I forgot to tell my reader, that on board the Dutch ship were fourteen
French huguenots, whom Misson thought fit to detain. When they were at
sea, he called them up, and proposed to them their taking on; telling
them at the same time, he left it to their choice, for he would have no
forced men; and that if they all, or any of them disapproved the
proposal, he would either give them the first vessel he met that was fit
for them, or set them ashore on some inhabited coast; and therefore bid
them take two days for consideration before they returned an answer; and
to encourage them, he called all hands up, and declared, that if any man
repented of the course of life he had chosen, his just dividend should
be counted to him, and he would set him on shore, either near the
Havanna, or some other convenient place; but not one accepted the offer,
and the fourteen prisoners unanimously resolved to join in with them; to
which resolution, no doubt, the hopes of a good booty from the St.
Joseph, and this offer of liberty, greatly contributed.

At the entrance of the Gulf they spied and came up with a large merchant
ship bound for London, from Jamaica; she had 20 guns, but no more than
thirty-two hands, so that it is not to be wondered at she made no
resistance; besides, she was deep laden with sugars. Mons. Misson took
out of her what ammunition she had, about four thousand pieces of eight,
some puncheons of rum, and ten hogsheads of sugar; and, without doing
her any further damage, let her proceed her voyage. What he valued most
in this prize was the men he got, for she was carrying to Europe twelve
French prisoners, two of which were necessary hands, being a carpenter
and his mate. They were of Bordeaux from whence they came in the
Pomechatraine, which was taken by the Mermaid off Petit Guave, after an
obstinate resistance, in which they lost 40 men. These men very
willingly came into Capt. Misson’s measures. Having been stripped to the
skin, they begged leave to make reprisals, but the captain would not
suffer them, though he told the master of the prize, as he protected him
and his men, he thought it reasonable these French should be clothed;
upon this the master contributed of his own, and every man bringing up
his chest, thought themselves very well off in sharing with them one
half.

Though Misson’s ship passed for a French man of war, yet his generosity
in letting the prize go, gave the English grounds to suspect the truth,
neither the ship nor cargo being of use to such as were upon the grand
account.

When they had lost all hopes of the St. Joseph, they coasted along the
north side of Cuba, and the Victoire growing now foul, they ran into a
landlocked bay on the E. N. E. point, where they hove her down by boats
and guns, though they could not pretend to heave her keel out; however,
they scraped and tallowed as far as they could go; they, for this
reason, many of them, repented they had let the last prize go, by which
they might have careened.

When they had righted the ship, and put every thing on board, they
consulted upon the course they should steer. Upon this the council
divided. The captain and Caraccioli, were for stretching over to the
African, and the others for New-England coast, alleging, that the ship
had a foul bottom, and was not fit for the voyage; and that if they met
with contrary winds, and bad weather, their stock of provision might
fall short; and that as they were not far from the English settlement of
Carolina, they might either on that or on the coast of Virginia,
Maryland, Pennsylvania, New-York, or New-England, intercept ships which
traded to the islands with provisions and by that means provide
themselves with bread, flour, and other necessaries. An account of the
provisions was taken, and finding they had provisions for four months,
Capt. Misson called all hands upon deck, and told them, as the council
differed in the course they should steer, he thought it reasonable to
have it put to the vote of the whole company. That for his part, he was
for going to the coast of Guinea, where they might reasonably expect to
meet with valuable prizes; but should they fail in their expectation one
way, they would be sure of having it answered in another; for they could
then throw themselves in that of East-India ships, and he need not tell
them, that the outward bound drained Europe of what money they drew from
America. He then gave the sentiments of those who were against him, and
their reasons, and begged that every one would give his opinion and vote
according as he thought most conducive to the good of all. That he
should be far from taking it ill if they should reject what he had
proposed, since he had no private views to serve. The majority of votes
fell on the captain’s side, and they accordingly shaped their course for
the coast of Guinea, in which voyage nothing remarkable happened. On
their arrival on the gold coast, they fell in with the Nieuwstadt, of
Amsterdam, a ship of 18 guns, commanded by Capt. Blaes, who made a
running fight of five glasses: this ship they kept with them, putting on
board 40 hands, and bringing all the prisoners on board the Victoire
they were forty-three in number; they left Amsterdam with fifty-six:
seven were killed in the engagement, and they had lost six by sickness
and accidents, one falling overboard, and one being taken by a shark,
going overboard in a calm.

The Nieuwstadt had some gold dust on board, to the value of about £2000
sterling and a few slaves to the number of seventeen, for she had but
just begun to trade; the slaves were a strengthening of their hands, for
the captain ordered them to be clothed out of the Dutch mariners’
chests, and told his men “That the trading for those of our own species
could never be agreeable to the eyes of divine justice: that no man had
power over the liberty of another; and while those who professed a more
enlightened knowledge of the Deity, sold men like beasts, they proved
that their religion was no more than grimace, and that they differed
from the barbarian in name only, since their practice was in nothing
more humane: for his part, and he hoped he spoke the sentiments of all
his brave companions, he had not exempted his neck from the galling yoke
of slavery, and asserted his own liberty to enslave others. That however
these men were distinguished from the Europeans by their colour,
customs, or religious rites, they were the work of the same omnipotent
Being, and indued with equal reason, wherefore he desired they might be
treated like freemen, (for he would banish even the name of slavery from
among them) and divided into messes among them, to the end they might
the sooner learn their language, be sensible of the obligation they had
to them, and more capable and zealous to defend that liberty they owed
to their justice and humanity.”

This speech of Misson’s was received with general applause, and the ship
rang with “_Vive le Capitaine Misson_.” _Long live Capt. Misson._—The
negroes were divided among the French, one to a mess, who, by their
gesticulations showed they were gratefully sensible of their being
delivered from their chains. Their ship growing very foul, and going
heavily through the water, they run into the river Lagoa, where they
hove her down, taking out such planks as had suffered most by the worms,
and substituting new in their room.

After this they careened the prize, and so put out to sea, steering to
the southward, and keeping along the coast, but met with nothing. All
this while, the greatest decorum and regularity was observed on board
the Victoire; but the Dutch prisoners’ example began to lead them into
swearing and drunkenness, which the captain remarking thought it was
best to nip these vices in the bud; and calling both the French and
Dutch upon deck, he addressed himself to the latter, desiring their
captain, who spoke French excellently well, to interpret what he said to
those who did not understand him. He told them, “before he had the
misfortune of having them on board, his ears were never grated with
hearing the name of the great Creator profaned, though he, to his
sorrow, had often since heard his own men guilty of that sin, which
administered neither profit nor pleasure, and might draw upon them a
severe punishment: that if they had a just idea of that great Being,
they would never mention him, but they would immediately reflect on his
purity and their own vileness. That we so easily took impressions from
our company, that the Spanish proverb says, _Let a hermit and a thief
live together, the thief would become hermit, or the hermit thief_, that
he saw this verified in his ship, for he could attribute the oaths and
curses he had heard among his brave companions, to nothing but the
odious example of the Dutch: that this was not the only vice they had
introduced, for before they were on board, his men were men, but he
found by their beastly pattern they were degenerated into brutes, by
drowning that only faculty which distinguishes between men and beasts,
_reason_. That as he had the honour to command them, he could not see
them run into these odious vices without a sincere concern, as he had a
paternal affection for them; and he should reproach himself as
neglectful of the common good, if he did not admonish them; and as by
the post with which they had honoured him, he was obliged to have a
watchful eye over their general interest; he was obliged to tell them
his sentiments were, that the Dutch allured them to a dissolute way of
life, that they might take some advantage over them: wherefore, as his
brave companions, he was assured, would be guided by reason, he gave the
Dutch notice, that the first whom he caught either with an oath in his
mouth or liquor in his head, should be brought to the geers, whipped and
pickled for an example to the rest of his nation; as to his friends, his
companions, his children, those gallant, those generous, noble, and
heroic souls he had the honour to command, he entreated them to allow a
small time for reflection, and to consider how little pleasure and how
much danger, might flow from imitating the vices of their enemies; and
that they would among themselves, make a law for the suppression of what
would otherwise estrange them from the source of life, and consequently
leave them destitute of his protection.”

It is not to be imagined what efficacy this speech had on both nations;
the Dutch grew continent in fear of punishment, and the French in fear
of being reproached by their good captain, for they never mentioned him
without this epithet. Upon the coast of Angola, they met with a second
Dutch ship, the cargo of which consisted of silk and woollen stuffs,
cloth, lace, wine, brandy, oil, spice, and hardware: the prize gave
chase and engaged her, but upon the coming up of the Victoire she
struck. This ship opportunely came in their way, and gave full employ to
the tailors, who were on board; for the whole crew began to be out at
elbows; they plundered her of what was of use to their own ship, and
then sunk her.

The captain having about ninety prisoners on board, proposed the giving
them the prize with what was necessary for their voyage, and sending
them away; which being agreed to, they shifted her ammunition on board
the Victoire, and giving them provisions to carry them to the
settlements the Dutch have on the coast, Misson called them up, told
them what was his design, and asked if any of them was willing to share
his fortune: eleven Dutch came in to him, two of whom were sailmakers,
one an armourer, and one a carpenter, necessary hands; the rest he let
go, not a little surprised at the regularity, tranquility, and humanity,
which they found among these new fashioned pirates.

They had now run the length of Saldanha bay, about ten leagues to the
northward of Table Bay. As here is good water, safe riding, plenty of
fish and fresh provision, to be got of the natives for the merchandise
they had on board, it was resolved to stay here some little time for
refreshments. When they had the bay open, they spied a tall ship, which
instantly got under sail, and hove out English colours. The Victoire
made clear ship, and hove out her French ensign, and a smart engagement
began. The English was a new ship built for 40 guns, though she had but
32 mounted, and 90 hands. Misson gave orders for boarding, and the
number of fresh men he constantly poured in, after an obstinate dispute
obliged the English to fly the decks, and leave the French masters of
their ship, who promised, and gave them good quarters and stripped not a
man.

They found on board the prize some bales of English broadcloth, and
about £60,000 in English crown pieces, and Spanish pieces of eight. The
English captain was killed in the engagement, and 14 of his men: the
French lost 12, which was no small mortification, but did not however
provoke them to use their prisoners harshly. Capt. Misson was sorry for
the death of the commander, whom he buried on shore, and one of his men
being a stone-cutter, he raised a stone over his grave with these words,
“_Icy gist un brave Anglois_,” _Here lies a gallant Englishman_. When he
was buried he made a triple discharge of fifty small arms, and fired
minute guns.

The English, knowing whose hands they were fallen into, and charmed with
Misson’s humanity, 30 of them, in three days space, desired to take on
with him. He accepted them, but at the same time gave them to
understand, that in taking on with him they were not to expect they
should be indulged in a dissolute and immoral life. He now divided his
company between the two ships, and made Caraccioli captain of the prize,
giving him officers chosen by the public suffrage. The 17 negroes began
to understand a little French, and to be useful hands, and in less than
a month all the English prisoners came over to him, except their
officers.

He had two ships well manned with resolute fellows: they now doubled the
cape, and made the S. end of Madagascar, and one of the Englishmen
telling Capt. Misson, that the European ships bound for Surat, commonly
touched at the island of Johanna, he sent for Capt. Caraccioli on board,
and it was agreed to cruise off that island. They accordingly sailed on
the West side of Madagascar, and off the bay de Diego. About half seas
over, between that bay, and the island of Johanna, they came up with an
English East-Indiaman, which made signals of distress as soon as she
spied Misson and his prize, they found her sinking by an unexpected
leak, and took all her men on board, though they could get little out of
her before she went down. The English, who were thus miraculously saved
from perishing, desired to be set on shore at Johanna, where they hoped
to meet with either a Dutch or English ship in a little time, and the
mean while they were sure of relief.

They arrived at Johanna, and were kindly received by the Queen Regent
and her brother, on account of the English on the one hand, and of their
strength on the other, which the queen’s brother, who had the
administration of affairs, was not able to make head against, and hoped
they might assist him against the king of Mohila, who threatened him
with a visit.

This is an island which is contiguous, in a manner, to Johanna, and lies
about N. W. by N. from it. Caraccioli told Misson he might take his
advantage in widening the breach between these two little monarchies,
and, by offering his assistance to that of Johanna, in a manner rule
both, for these would court him as their protector, and those come to
any terms to buy his friendship, by which means he would hold the
balance of power between them. He followed this advice, and offered his
friendship and assistance to the queen, who very readily embraced it.

I must advise the reader, that many of this island speak English, and
that the Englishmen who were of Misson’s crew, and his interpreters,
told them, their captain, though not an Englishman, was their friend and
ally, and a friend and brother to the Johanna men, for they esteemed the
English beyond all other nations.

They were supplied by the queen with all necessaries of life, and Misson
married her sister, as Caraccioli did the daughter of her brother, whose
armoury, which consisted before of no more than two rusty fire-locks and
three pistols, he furnished with 30 fuzils, as many pair of pistols, and
gave him two barrels of powder and four of ball.

Several of his men took wives, and some required their share of the
prizes, which was justly given them, they designing to settle in this
island; but the number of these did not exceed ten, which loss was
repaired by thirty of the crew (they had saved from perishing) coming in
to him.

While they past their time in all manner of diversions the place would
afford them, as hunting, feasting, and visiting the island, the king of
Mohila, made a descent, and alarmed the whole country. Misson advised
the queen’s brother not to give him any impediment but let him get into
the heart of the island, and he would take care to intercept their
return; but the prince answered, should he follow this advice the enemy
would do him and his subjects an irreparable damage, in destroying the
cocoa walks, and for that reason he must endeavour to stop his progress.
Upon this answer he asked the English who were not under his command, if
they were willing to join him in repelling the enemies of their common
host, and one and all consenting, he gave them arms, and mixed them with
his own men, and about the same number of Johannians, under the command
of Caraccioli and the queen’s brother, and arming out all his boats, he
went himself to the westward of the island, where they made their
descent. The party which went by land, fell in with, and beat the
Mohilians with great ease, who were in the greatest consternation, to
find their retreat cut off by Misson’s boats. The Johannians, whom they
had often molested, were so enraged, that they gave quarter to none, and
out of 300 who made the descent, if Misson and Caraccioli had not
interposed, not a soul had escaped; 113 were taken prisoners, by his
men, and carried on board his ships. These he sent safe to Mohila, with
a message to the king, to desire he would make peace with his friend and
ally the king of Johanna; but that prince, little affected with the
service done him in the preservation of his subjects, sent him word he
took laws from none, and knew when to make war and peace without his
advice, which he neither asked nor wanted. Misson irritated by this rude
answer, resolved to transfer the war into his own country, and
accordingly set sail for Mohila, with about 100 Johanna men. The shore
on sight of the ships, was filled with men to hinder a descent if
intended, but the great guns soon dispersed this rabble, and under their
cover he landed the Johannians, and an equal number of French and
English. They were met by about 700 Mohilians, who pretended to stop
their passage, but their darts and arrows were of little avail against
Misson’s fuzils; the first discharge made a great slaughter, and about
20 shells which were thrown among them, put them to a confused flight.
The party of Europeans and Johannians then marched to their metropolis,
without resistance, which they reduced to ashes, and the Johannians cut
down all the cocoa walks that they could for the time, for towards
evening they returned to their ships, and stood off to sea.

At their return to Johanna the queen made a festival, and magnified the
bravery and service of her guests, friends, and allies. This feast
lasted four days, at the expiration of which time the queen’s brother
proposed to Capt. Misson the making another descent, in which he would
go in person, and did not doubt subjecting the Mohilians; but this was
not the design of Misson, who had thoughts of fixing a retreat on the N.
W. side of Madagascar, and looked upon the feuds between these two
islands advantageous to his views, and therefore no way his interest to
suffer the one to overcome the other; for while the variance was kept
up, and their forces pretty much upon a level, it was evident their
interest would make both sides caress him; he therefore answered, that
they ought to deliberate on the consequences, for they might be deceived
in their hopes, and find the conquest less easy than they imagined. That
the king of Mohila would be more upon his guard, and not only intrench
himself, but gall them with frequent ambuscades, by which they must
inevitably lose a number of men; and, if they were forced to retire with
loss, raise the courage of the Mohilians, and make them irreconcilable
enemies to the Johannians, and entirely deprive him of the advantages
with which he might now make a peace, having twice defeated them: that
he could not be always with them, and at his leaving Johanna he might
expect the king of Mohila would endeavour to take a bloody revenge for
the late damages. The queen gave entirely into Misson’s sentiments.

While this was in agitation, four Mohilians arrived as ambassadors to
propose a peace. Finding the Johannians upon high terms, one of them
spoke to this purpose:—_O ye Johannians, do not conclude from you late
success, that fortune will be always favourable; she will not always
give you the protection of the Europeans, and without their help it is
possible you might now sue for a peace, which you seem averse to.
Remember the sun rises, comes to its meridian height, and stays not
there, but declines in a moment. Let this admonish you to reflect on the
constant revolution of all sublunary affairs, and the greater is your
glory, the nearer you are to your declension. We are taught by every
thing we see, that there is no stability in the world, but nature is in
continual movement. The sea, which overflows the sands, has its bounds
set, which it cannot pass, which the moment it has reached, without
abiding, returns back to the bosom of the deep. Every herb, every shrub
and tree, and even our own bodies teach us this lesson, that nothing is
durable, or can be counted upon. Time passes away insensibly, one sun
follows another, and brings its changes with it. To-day’s globe of light
sees you strengthened by these Europeans elate with victory, and we, who
have been used to conquer you, come to ask a peace. To-morrow’s sun may
see you deprived of your present succours, and the Johannians
petitioning us: as therefore we cannot say what to-morrow may bring
forth, it would be unwise on uncertain hopes to forego a certain
advantage, as surely peace ought to be esteemed by every wise man._

Having said this, the ambassadors withdraw, and were treated by the
queen’s orders. After the council had concluded, they were again called
upon, and the queen told them, that by the advice of her good friends,
the Europeans, and those of her council, she agreed to make peace, which
she wished might banish all memory of former injuries; that they must
own the war was begun by them, and that she was far from being the
aggressor; she only defended herself in her own kingdom, which they had
often invaded, though, till within a few days, she had never molested
their coasts. If then they really desired to live amicably with her,
they must resolve to send two of the king’s children, and ten of the
first nobility, as hostages: that they might, when they pleased, return,
for these were the only terms on which she would desist prosecuting the
advantages she now had, with the utmost vigour.

The ambassadors returned with this answer, and, about ten days after,
the two ships appearing upon their coasts, they sent off to give notice,
that their king complied with the terms proposed, would send the
hostages, and desired a cessation of all hostility, and, at the same
time, invited the commanders on shore. The Johanna men on board
dissuaded their accepting the invitation; but Misson and Caraccioli,
fearing nothing, went, but armed their boat’s crew. They were received
by the king with demonstrations of friendship, and they dined with him
under a tamarind tree; but when they parted from him, and were returning
to their boats, they were inclosed by at least a hundred of the
Mohilians, who set upon them with the utmost fury, and, in the first
flight of arrows, wounded both the captains, and killed four of their
boat’s crew, of eight who were with them. They, in return, discharged
their pistols with some execution, and fell in with their cutlasses; but
all their bravery would have stood them in little stead, had not the
report of their pistols alarmed and brought the rest of their friends to
their assistance, who took their fuzils, and coming up while they were
engaged, discharged a volley on the back of the assailants, which laid
twelve of them dead on the spot. The ships hearing this fire, sent
immediately the yawls and long-boats well manned. Though the islanders
were a little damped in their courage by this fire of the boat’s crew,
yet they did not give over the fight, and one of them desperately threw
himself upon Caraccioli, and gave him a deep wound in the side with a
long knife; but he paid for the rashness of the attempt with his life,
one of the crew cleaving his scull. The yawls and long-boats now
arrived, and being guided by the noise, reinforced their companions, put
the traitors to flight, and brought off their dead and wounded. The
Europeans lost by this treachery, seven slain outright, and eight
wounded, six of which recovered.

The crew were resolved to revenge the blood of their officers and
comrades the next day, and were accordingly on the point of landing,
when two canoes came off with two men bound, the pretended authors of
this treason, without the king’s knowledge, who had sent them that they
might receive the punishment due to their villany. The Johanna men on
board were called for interpreters, who having given this account,
added, that the king only sacrificed these men, but that they should not
believe him, for he certainly had given orders for assassinating the
Europeans; and the better way was to kill all the Mohilians that came in
the canoes, as well as the two prisoners; go back to Johanna, take more
of their countrymen, and give no peace to traitors; but Misson was for
no such violent measures; he was averse to every thing that bore the
face of cruelty, and thought a bloody revenge, if necessity did not
enforce it, spoke a grovelling and timid soul: he, therefore, sent those
of the canoes back, and bid them tell their king, if before the evening
he sent the hostages agreed upon, he should give credit to his excuse;
but if he did not, he should believe him the author of the late vile
attempt on his life.

The canoes went off, but returned not with an answer; wherefore, he bid
the Johanna men tell the two prisoners that they should be set on shore
the next morning, and ordered them to acquaint their king, he was no
executioner to put those to death whom he had condemned, but that he
should find he knew how to revenge himself of his treason. The prisoners
being unbound, threw themselves at his feet, and begged that he would
not send them ashore, for they should be surely put to death, for the
crime they had committed, was, the dissuading the barbarous action of
which they were accused as authors.

Next day, the two ships landed 200 men, under the cover of their cannon;
but that precaution of bringing their ships close to the shore, they
found needless: not a soul appearing, they marched two leagues up the
country, when they saw a body of men appear behind some shrubs.
Caraccioli’s lieutenant, who commanded the right wing, with fifty men,
made up to them, but found he had got among pit-falls artificially
covered, several of his men falling into them, which made him halt, and
not pursue those Mohilians who made a feint retreat to ensnare him,
thinking it dangerous to proceed farther; and seeing no enemy would face
them, they retired the same way they came, and getting into their boats,
went on board the ships, resolving to return with a strong
reinforcement, and make descents at one and the same time in different
parts of the island. They asked the two prisoners how the country lay,
and what the soil was on the north side of the island; and they answered
it was morass, and the most dangerous part to attempt, it being a place
where they shelter on any imminent danger.

The ships returned to Johanna, where the greatest tenderness and care
was shown for the recovery and cure of the two captains and of their
men; they lay six weeks before they were able to walk the decks, for
neither of them would quit his ship. Their Johanna wives expressed a
concern they did not think them capable of; nay, a wife of one of the
wounded men who died, stood some time looking upon the corpse as
motionless as a statue, then embracing it, without shedding a tear,
desired she might take it ashore to wash and bury it; and at the same
time by an interpreter, and with a little mixture of European language,
begged her late husband’s friends would take their leave of him the next
day.

Accordingly a number went ashore, and carried with them the dividend,
which fell to his share, which the captain ordered to be given to his
widow; when she saw the money, she smiled, and asked if all that was for
her?—Being answered in the affirmative, “and what good will all that
shining dirt do me? If I could with it purchase the life of my husband,
and call him back from the grave, I would accept it with pleasure, but
as it is not sufficient to allure him back to this world, I have no use
for it; do with it what you please.” Then she desired they would go with
her and perform the last ceremonies to her husband’s dead body, after
their country fashion, lest he should be displeased; that she could not
stay with them, to be a witness, because she was in haste to go and be
married again. She startled the Europeans who heard this latter part of
her speech, so dissonant from the beginning; however they followed her,
and she led them into a plantain walk, where they found a great many
Johanna men and women, sitting under the shade of plantains, round the
corpse, which lay (as they all sat) on the ground, covered with flowers.
She embraced them round, and then the Europeans, one by one, and after
these ceremonies, she poured out a number of bitter imprecations against
the Mohila men, whose treachery had darkened her husband’s eyes, and
made him insensible of her caresses, who was her first love, to whom she
had given her heart with her virginity. She then proceeded in his
praises, calling him the joy of infants, the love of virgins, the
delight of the old, and the wonder of the young, adding, he was strong
and beautiful as the cedar, brave as the bull, tender as the kid, and
loving as the ground turtle. Having finished this oration, not unlike
those of the Romans, which the nearest relation of the deceased used to
pronounce from the rostrum, she laid down by the side of her husband,
embracing him, and sitting up again, gave herself a deep wound under the
left breast with a bayonet, and fell dead on her husband’s corpse.

The Europeans were astonished at the tenderness and the resolution of
the girl, for she was not, by what her mien spoke her, past seventeen;
and they now admired, as much as they had secretly detested her, for
saying she was in haste to be married again, the meaning of which they
did not understand.

After the husband and wife were buried, the crew returned on board, and
gave an account of what had passed; the captains’ wives (for Misson and
his were on board the Bijoux, the name they had given their prize from
her make and gilding) seemed not in the least surprised, and
Caraccioli’s lady only said, she must be of noble descent, for none but
the families of the nobility had the privilege allowed them of following
their husbands, on pain if they transgressed, of being thrown into the
sea, to be eat by fish; and they knew that their souls could not rest as
long as any of the fish, who fed upon them, lived. Misson asked, if they
intended to have done the same thing had they died? “We should not,”
answered his wife, “have disgraced our families; nor is our tenderness
for our husbands inferior to hers whom you seem to admire.”

After their recovery, Misson proposed a cruise, on the coast of
Zanguebar, which being agreed to, he and Caraccioli, took leave of the
queen and her brother, and would have left their wives on the island,
but they could by no means be induced to the separation; it was in vain
to urge the shortness of the time they were to cruise; they answered it
was not farther than Mohila they intended to go, and if they were
miserable in that short absence, they could never support a longer; and
if they would not allow them to keep them company in the voyage, they
must not expect to see them at their return, if they intended one.

In a word, they were obliged to yield to them, but told them, if the
views of their men should insist as strongly on following their example,
their tenderness would be their ruin, and make them a prey to their
enemies; they answered, the queen should prevent that, by ordering that
no woman should go on board, and if any were in the ships, they should
return on shore: this order was accordingly made, and they set sail for
the river Mozambique. In about ten days’ cruise after they had left
Johanna, and about 15 leagues to the eastward of this river, they fell
in with a stout Portuguese ship of 60 guns, which engaged them from
break of day till two in the afternoon, when the captain being killed,
and a great number of men lost, she struck; this proved a very rich
prize, for she had the value of £250,000 sterling on board, in gold
dust. The two women never quit the decks all the time of the engagement,
neither gave they the least mark of fear except for their husbands. This
engagement cost them 30 men, and Caraccioli lost his right leg; the
slaughter fell mostly on the English, for of the above number, 20 were
of that nation: the Portuguese lost double the number. Caraccioli’s
wound made them resolve to make the best of their way for Johanna, where
the greatest care was taken of their wounded, not one of whom died,
though their number amounted to 27.

Caraccioli kept his bed two months; but Misson seeing him in a fair way
of recovery, took what hands could be spared from the Bijoux, leaving
her sufficient for defence, and went out, having mounted ten of the
Portuguese guns, for he had hitherto carried but thirty, though he had
ports for forty. He stretched over to Madagascar, and coasted along this
island to the northward, as far as the most northerly point, when
turning back, he entered a bay to the northward of Diego Suares. He run
ten leagues up this bay, and on the larboard side found it afforded a
large, and safe harbour, with plenty of fresh water. He came to an
anchor, went on shore and examined the nature of the soil, which he
found rich, the air wholesome, and the country level. He told his men
this was an excellent place for an asylum, and that he determined here
to fortify and raise a small town, and make docks for shipping, that
they might have some place to call their own; and a receptacle, when age
or wounds had rendered them incapable of hardship, where they might
enjoy the fruits of their labour, and go to their graves in peace: that
he would not, however, set about this, till he had the approbation of
the whole company; and were he sure they would all approve this design,
which he hoped, it being evidently for the general good, he should not
think it advisable to begin any works, lest the natives should, in his
absence, destroy them; but, however, as they had nothing upon their
hands, if they were of his opinion, they might begin to fall and square
timber, ready for the raising a wooden fort, when they returned with
their companions.

The captain’s motion was universally applauded, and in ten days they
felled and rough hewed a hundred and fifty large trees, without any
interruption from or seeing any of the inhabitants. They felled their
timber at the waters’ edge, so that they had not the trouble of hauling
them any way, which would have employed a great deal more time: they
returned again, and acquainted their companions with what they had seen
and done, and with the captain’s resolution, which they one and all came
into.

Capt. Misson then told the queen, as he had been serviceable to her in
her war with the island of Mohila, and might continue to be of farther
use, he did not question her lending him assistance in the settling
himself on the coast of Madagascar, and to that end furnish him with 300
men, to help in his buildings. The queen answered, she could do nothing
without consent of council, and that she would assemble her nobility,
and did not question their agreeing to anything he could reasonably
desire, for they were sensible of the obligations the Johannians had to
him. The council was accordingly called, and Misson’s demand being told,
one of the eldest said, he did not think it expedient to comply with it,
nor safe to refuse; that they should in agreeing to give him that
assistance, help to raise a power, which might prove formidable to
themselves, by the being so near a neighbour; and these men who had
lately protected, might, when they found it for their interest, enslave
them. On the other hand, if they did not comply, they had the power to
do them great damage: that they were to make choice of the least of two
possible evils, for he could prognosticate no good to Johanna, by their
settling near it. Another answered, that many of them had Johanna wives:
that it was not likely they would make enemies of the Johanna men at the
first settling, because their friendship might be of use to them; and
from their children there was nothing to be apprehended in the next
generation, for they would be half their own blood; that in the mean
while, if they complied with the request, they might be sure of an ally
and protector against the king of Mohila; wherefore, he was for agreeing
to the demand.

After a long debate, in which every inconvenience and advantage was
maturely considered, it was agreed to send with him the number of men he
required, on condition he should send them back in four moons, make an
alliance with them, and war against Mohila. This being agreed to, they
staid till Caraccioli was thoroughly recovered: then putting the
Johannians on board the Portuguese ship, with forty French and English,
and fifteen Portuguese to work her, and setting sail, they arrived at
the place where Misson designed his settlement, which he called
_Libertatia_, and gave the name of _Liberi_ to his people, desiring in
that might be drowned the distinguished names of French, English, Dutch,
Africans, &c.

The first thing they set about was, the raising a fort on each side the
harbour, which they made of an octagon figure, and having finished and
mounted them with forty guns taken out of the Portuguese, they raised a
battery on an angle, of ten guns, and began to raise houses and
magazines under the protection of their forts and ships; the Portuguese
was unrigged, and all her sails and cordage carefully laid up. While
they were very busily employed in the raising a town, a party which had
often hunted and rambled four or five leagues off their settlement,
resolved to venture farther into the country. They made themselves some
huts, at about four leagues distance from their companions, and
travelled E. S. E. about five leagues farther into the country, when
they came up with a black, who was armed with a bow, arrows, and a
javelin: they with a friendly appearance engaged the fellow to lay by
his fear, and go with them. They carried him to their companions, and
there entertained him three days with a great deal of humanity, and then
returned with him near the place they found him, and made him a present
of a piece of scarlet baize, and an axe. He appeared overjoyed with the
present, and left them with seeming satisfaction.

The hunters imagined that there might be some village not far off, and
observing that he looked at the sun, and then took his way directly
south, they travelled on the same point of the compass, and from the top
of a hill they spied a pretty large village, and went down to it: the
men came out with their arms, such as before described, bows, arrows,
and javelins; but upon two only of the whites advancing, with presents
of axes and baize in their hands, they sent only four to meet them. The
misfortune was, that they could not understand one another: but by their
pointing to the sun, and holding up one finger, and making one of them
go forward, and return again with showing their circumcision, and
pointing up to heaven with one finger, they apprehended they gave them
to understand there was but one God, who had sent one prophet, and
concluded from thence, and their circumcision, they were Mahometans. The
presents were carried to their chief, and he seemed to receive them
kindly, and by signs invited the whites into their village; but they
remembering the late treachery of the Mohilians, made signs for victuals
to be brought to them where they were.

☞ _The remainder of Captain Misson’s History will be found incorporated
with that of Captain Tew._


                          CAPTAIN JOHN BOWEN.

The exact time of this person’s setting out I am not certain of. I find
him cruising on the Malabar coast in the year 1700, commanding a ship
called the Speaker, whose crew consisted of men of all nations, and
their piracies were committed upon ships of all nations likewise. The
pirates here met with no manner of inconveniencies in carrying on their
designs, for it was made so much a trade, that the merchants of one town
never scrupled the buying commodities taken from another, though but ten
miles distant, in a public sale, furnishing the robbers at the same time
with all necessaries, even of vessels, when they had occasion to go on
any expedition, which they themselves would often advise them of.

Among the rest, an English East-Indiaman, Capt. Coneway, from Bengal,
fell into the hands of this crew, which they made prize of, near
Callequilon. They carried her in, and put her up to sale, dividing the
ship and cargo into three shares; one third was sold to a merchant,
native of Callequilon aforesaid, another third to a merchant of Porca,
and the other to one Malpa, a Dutch factor.

Loaded with the spoil of this and several country ships they left the
coast, and steered for Madagascar; but in their voyage thither, meeting
with adverse winds, and, being negligent in their steerage, they ran
upon St. Thomas’s reef, at the island of Mauritius, where the ship was
lost; but Bowen and the greatest part of the crew got safe ashore.

They met here with all the civility and good treatment imaginable. Bowen
was complimented in a particular manner by the governor, and splendidly
entertained in his house; the sick men were got, with great care, into
the fort, and cured by their doctor, and no supplies of any sort,
wanting for the rest. They spent here three months, but yet resolving to
set down at Madagascar, they bought a sloop, which they converted into a
brigantine, and about the middle of March, 1701, departed, having first
taken formal leave of the governor, by making a present of 2500 pieces
of eight; leaving him, besides, the wreck of their ship, with the guns,
stores, and every thing else that was saved. The governor, on his part,
supplied them with necessaries for their voyage, which was but short,
and gave them a kind invitation to make that island a place of
refreshment in the course of their future adventures, promising that
nothing should be wanting to them that his government afforded.

Upon their arrival at Madagascar, they put in at a place on the east
side, called Maritan, quit their vessel, and settled themselves ashore
in a fruitful plain on the side of a river. They built themselves a fort
on the river’s mouth, towards the sea, and another small one on the
other side, towards the country; the first to prevent a surprise from
shipping, and the other as a security from the natives, many of whom
they employed in the building. They built also a little town for their
habitation, which took up the remainder of the year 1701.

When this was done, they soon became dissatisfied with their new
situation, having a hankering mind after their old employment, and
accordingly resolved to fit up the brigantine they had from the Dutch at
Mauritius, which was laid in a cove near their settlement; but an
accident, that they improved, provided for them in a better manner, and
saved them a great deal of trouble.

It happened that about the beginning of the year 1702, a ship called the
Speedy Return, belonging to the Scotch-African and East-India company,
Capt. Drummond, commander, came into the port of Maritan in Madagascar,
with a brigantine that belonged to her; they had before taken in negroes
at St. Mary’s, a little island adjoining to the main land of Madagascar,
and carried them to Don Mascarenhas, from whence they sailed to this
port on the same trade.

On the ship’s arrival, Capt. Drummond, with Andrew Wilky, his surgeon,
and several others of the crew, went on shore; in the mean time John
Bowen, with four others of his consorts, went off in a little boat, on
pretence of buying some of their merchandise brought from Europe: and
finding a fair opportunity, the chief mate, boatswain, and a hand or two
more only upon deck, and the rest at work in the hold they threw off
their mask; each drew out a pistol and hanger, and told them they were
all dead men if they did not retire that moment to the cabin. The
surprise was sudden, and they thought it necessary to obey: one of the
pirates placed himself sentry at the door, with his arms in his hands,
and the rest immediately laid the hatches, and then made a signal to
their fellows on shore as agreed on; upon which, about forty or fifty
came on board, and took quiet possession of the ship, and afterwards the
brigantine, without bloodshed, or striking a stroke. Bowen was made, or
rather made himself, of course, captain; he detained the old crew, or
the greatest part thereof, burnt the Dutch brigantine as being of no use
to them, cleaned and fitted the ship, took water, provisions, and what
necessaries were wanting, and made ready for new adventures.

Having thus piratically possessed himself of Capt. Drummond’s ship and
brigantine, and being informed by the crew, that when they left Don
Mascarenhas, a ship called the Rook galley, Capt. Honeycomb, commander,
was lying in that bay, Bowen resolved, with the other pirates, to sail
thither, but it taking up seven or eight days in watering their vessels,
and settling their private affairs, they arrived not at the island till
after the departure of the said galley, who thereby happily escaped the
villaneous snare of their unprovoked enemies.

The night after the pirates left Maritan, the brigantine ran on a ledge
of rocks off the west side of the island of Madagascar, which not being
perceived by the ship, Bowen came into Mascarenhas without her, not
knowing what was become of his consort. Here he stayed eight or ten
days, in which time he supplied the ship with provisions, and judging
that the Rook galley was gone to some other island, the ship sailed to
Mauritius, in search of her; but the pirates seeing four or five ships
in the N. W. harbour, they thought themselves too weak to attempt any
thing there; so they stood immediately for Madagascar again, and arrived
safe, first at Port Dauphin and then at Augustin Bay. In a few days the
Content brigantine, which they supposed either to have been lost, or
revolted that honourable service, came into the same bay, and informed
their brethren of the misfortune that happened to them.

The rogues were glad, no doubt, of seeing one another again, and calling
a council together, they found the brigantine in no condition for
business, being then very leaky; therefore she was condemned, and
forthwith hauled ashore and burnt, and the crew united, and all went on
board the Speedy Return.

At this place the pirates were made acquainted, by the negroes, of the
adventures of another gang that had settled for some time near that
harbour, and had one Howard for their captain. It was the misfortune of
an India ship called the Prosperous, to come into the bay at the time
that these rogues were looking out for employment; who under the
pretence of trading (almost in the same manner that Bowen and his gang
had seized the Speedy Return) made themselves master of her, and sailed
with her to New Mathelage. Bowen and his gang consulting together on
this intelligence, concluded it was more for their interest to join in
alliance with this new company, than to act single, they being too weak
of themselves to undertake any considerable enterprise, remembering how
they were obliged to bear away from the island of Mauritius, when they
were in search of the Rook galley, which they might have taken, with
several others, had they had, at that time, a consort of equal force to
their own ship.

They accordingly set sail from the bay, and came into New Mathelage, but
found no ship there, though upon enquiry they understood that the pirate
they looked for, had been at the place, but was gone; so after some stay
they proceeded to Johanna, but the Prosperous not being there neither,
they sailed to Mayotta, where they found her lying at anchor. This was
about Christmas, 1702.

Here these two powers struck up an alliance. Howard liking the
proposals, came readily into it, and the treaty was ratified by both
companies. They stayed about two months at this island, thinking it,
perhaps, as likely a place to meet with prey as cruising out for it, and
so indeed it happened; for about the beginning of March, the ship
Pembroke, belonging to our East-India company, coming in for water, was
boarded by their boats, and taken, with the loss of the chief mate and
another man that were killed in the skirmish.

The two pirate ships weighed, and went out to sea along with their
prize, and that day and the next plundered her of the best part of her
cargo, provisions, and stores, and then taking the captain and carpenter
away, they let the Pembroke go where the remainder of her crew pleased,
and came with their ships into New Mathelage. Here the two captains
consulted, and laid a plan for a cruise to India, for which purpose they
detained Capt. Woolley, of the Pembroke, lately taken, in order to be
their pilot in those seas; but a very hot dispute arose between the two
companies which ship he should go aboard of, insomuch that they had gone
together by the ears, if an expedient had not been found to satisfy each
party, that one might not have the advantage of the other by the
captain’s skill and knowledge of the Indian coast, and this was to knock
the poor man on the head, and murder him: but at last, by the authority
of Bowen, Capt. Woolley escaped the threatened danger, by bringing his
company to consent to his remaining on board the Prosperous, where he
then was.

The Speedy Return being foul, and wanting a little repair was judged
proper for her to go back to Augustin Bay to clean; in the mean while
the Prosperous was to have a pair of boot-tops where she lay, and
likewise to take in water and provisions, and then to join their consort
again at Mayotta, the island appointed for the rendezvous.

The Prosperous put into Mayotta as agreed on, and waiting there some
time for Bowen’s ship, without seeing or hearing any news of her, went
to Johanna, but not meeting with her there, they apprehended some
accident had befell her, and therefore left the place, and sailed on the
expedition themselves. As to the Speedy Return, she arrived safe at St.
Augustin Bay, at Madagascar, and there cleaned and victualled; but
tarrying there somewhat too long, the winds hung contrary, and they
could not for their lives beat up to Mayotta, and therefore went up to
Johanna, where, hearing that their friends had lately left that Island,
they steered for the Red Sea, but the wind not proving fair for their
design, they bore away for the high land of St. John’s near Surat, where
they once more fell in company with their brethren of the Prosperous.

They cruised together as was first agreed on, and after some time they
had sight of four ships, to which they gave chase; but these separating,
two standing to the northward, and two to the southward, the pirates
separated likewise, Bowen standing after those that steered southerly,
and Howard crowding after the others. Bowen came up with the heaviest of
the two, which proved to be a Moorish ship of 700 tons, bound from the
Gulf of Mocha to Surat. The pirates brought the prize into Rajapora, on
the coast of India, where they plundered her; the merchandise they sold
to the natives, but a small sum of current gold they found aboard,
amounting to £22,000 English money, they put into their pockets. Two
days after, the Prosperous came in, but without any prize; however, they
soon made their friends acquainted that they had not succeeded worse
than themselves, for at Surat river’s mouth, where all the four ships
were bound, they came up with their chase, and with a broad side, one of
them struck, but the other got into the bay. They stood down the coast
with the prize till they had plundered her of the best of her cargo, the
most valuable of which was 84,000 sequins, a piece of about ten
shillings each, and then they left her adrift, without either anchor or
cable, off Daman.

While they were lying at Rajapora they passed a survey on their
shipping, and judging their own to be less serviceable than their prize,
they voted them to the flames, and straightway fitted up the Surat ship.
They transported both companies aboard of her, and then set fire to the
Prosperous and Speedy Return. They mustered at this place 164 fighting
men; 43 only were English, the greater number French, the rest Danes,
Swedes, and Dutch. They took on board 70 Indians to do the drudgery of
the ship, and mounted 56 guns, calling her the Defiance, and sailed from
Rajapora the latter end of October, in the year 1703 to cruise on the
coast of Malabar. But not meeting with prey in this first cruise, they
came to an anchor about three leagues to the northward of Cochen,
expecting some boats to come off with supplies of refreshments, for
which purpose they fired several guns, by way of signal, but none
appearing, the quarter-master was sent in the pinnace to confer with the
people, which he did with some caution, keeping the boat upon their oars
at the shore side. In short, they agreed very well, the pirates were
promised whatever necessaries they wanted, and the boat returned aboard.

The next day a boat came off from the town with hogs, goats, wine, &c.
with a private intimation from Malpa, the Dutch broker, an old friend of
the pirates, that a ship of that country called the Rhimæ, lay then in
Mudbay, not many leagues off, and if they would go out and take her, he
would purchase the cargo of them, and likewise promised that they should
be further supplied with pitch, tar, and all other necessaries, which
was made good to them; for people from the factory flocked aboard every
hour, and dealt with them as in open market, for all sorts of
merchandise, refreshments, jewels, and plate, returning with coffers of
money, &c. to a great value.

The advice of the ship was taken very kindly, but the pirates judging
their own ship too large to go close into the bay, consulted their
friend upon means for taking the said ship, who readily treated with
them for the sale of one of less burthen, that then lay in the harbour;
but Malpa speaking to one Punt, of the factory, to carry her out, he not
only refused to be concerned in such a piece of villany, but reproved
Malpa for corresponding with the pirates, and told him, if he should be
guilty of so base an action, he must never see the face of any of his
countrymen more; which made the honest broker change both his
countenance and his purpose.

At this place Capt. Woolley, whom they had taken for their pilot on the
Indian coast, being in a very sick and weak condition, was, at his
earnest entreaty, discharged from his severe confinement among them, and
set ashore, and the next day the pirates sailed, and ranged along the
Malabar coast, in quest of more booty. In their way they met a second
time with the Pembroke, and plundered her of some sugar, and other small
things, and let her go again. From the coast they sailed back for the
Island of Mauritius, where they lay some time, and lived after their
usual extravagant manner.


                          CAPTAIN ROBERT KIDD.

We are now going to give an account of one whose name is well known in
England. The person we mean is Capt. Kidd, whose public trial and
execution here, rendered him the subject of all conversation, so that
his actions have been chanted about in ballads. However, it is now a
considerable time since these things passed, and though the people knew
in general that Capt. Kidd was hanged, and that his crime was piracy,
yet there were scarce any, even at that time, who were acquainted with
his life or actions, or could account for his turning pirate.

In the beginning of king William’s war, Capt. Kidd commanded a privateer
in the West-Indies, and by several adventurous actions acquired the
reputation of a brave man, as well as an experienced seaman. About this
time the pirates were very troublesome in those parts: wherefore Capt.
Kidd was recommended by the Lord Bellamont, then governor of Barbadoes,
as well as by several other persons, to the government here, as a person
very fit to be entrusted with the command of a government ship, and to
be employed in cruising upon the pirates, as knowing those seas
perfectly well, and being acquainted with all their lurking places; but
what reasons governed the politics of those times I cannot tell, but
this proposal met with no encouragement here, though it is certain it
would have been of great consequence to the subject, our merchants
suffering incredible damages by those robbers.

Upon this neglect, the lord Bellamont and some others, who knew what
great captures had been made by the pirates, and what a prodigious
wealth must be in their possessions, were tempted to fit out a ship at
their own private charge, and to give the command of her to Capt. Kidd;
and to give the thing a greater reputation, as well as to keep their
seamen under the better command, they procured the king’s commission for
the said Capt. Kidd, of which the following is an exact copy:

  _William Rex._

  “WILLIAM THE THIRD, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
  France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. To our trusty and
  well beloved Capt. ROBERT KIDD, commander of the ship the Adventure
  galley, or to any other the commander of the same for the time
  being, _Greeting_. Whereas we are informed, that Capt. Thomas Too,
  John Ireland, Capt Thomas Wake, and Capt. William Maze, or Mace, and
  other subjects, natives or inhabitants of New-York, and elsewhere,
  in our plantations in America, have associated themselves with
  divers others, wicked and ill-disposed persons, and do against the
  law of nations commit many and great piracies, robberies, and
  depredations on the seas upon the parts of America, and in other
  parts, to the great hindrance and discouragement of trade and
  navigation, and to the great danger and hurt of our loving subjects,
  our allies, and all others, navigating the seas upon their lawful
  occasions. NOW KNOW YE, that we being desirous to prevent the
  aforesaid mischiefs, and as much as in us lies, to bring the said
  pirates, free-booters and sea-rovers to justice, have thought fit,
  and do hereby give and grant to the said Robert Kidd (to whom our
  commissioners for exercising the office of Lord High Admiral of
  England, have granted a commission as a private man of war, bearing
  date the 11th day of December, 1695,) and unto the commander of the
  said ship for the time being, and unto the officers, mariners, and
  others, which shall be under your command, full power and authority
  to apprehend, seize, and take into your custody as well the said
  Capt. Thomas Too, John Ireland, Capt. Thomas Wake, and Capt. William
  Maze, or Mace, as all such pirates, free-booters, and sea-rovers,
  being either our subjects, or of other nations associated with them,
  which you shall meet with upon the seas or coasts of America, or
  upon any other seas or coasts, with all their ships and vessels, and
  all such merchandise, money, goods, and wares as shall be found on
  board, or with them, in case they shall willingly yield themselves;
  but if they will not yield without fighting, then you are by force
  to compel them to yield. And we also require you to bring, or cause
  to be brought, such pirates, free-booters, or sea-rovers, as you
  shall seize, to a legal trial, to the end they may be proceeded
  against according to the law in such cases. And we do hereby command
  all our officers, ministers, and other our loving subjects
  whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting to you in the premises. And
  we do hereby enjoin you to keep an exact journal of your proceedings
  in the execution of the premises, and set down the names of such
  pirates, and of their officers and company, and the names of such
  ships and vessels as you shall by virtue of these presents take and
  seize, and the quantities of arms, ammunition, provision, and lading
  of such ships, and the true value of the same, as near as you judge.
  And we do hereby strictly charge and command you, as you will answer
  the contrary at your peril, that you do not, in any manner, offend
  or molest our friends or allies, their ships or subjects, by colour
  or pretence of these presents, or the authority thereby granted. _In
  witness whereof_, we have caused our great seal of England to be
  affixed to these presents. Given at our court at Kensington, the
  26th day of January, 1695, in the 7th year of our reign.”

Capt. Kidd had also another commission, which was called a commission of
reprisals; for it being then war time, this commission was to justify
him in the taking of French merchant ships, in case he should meet with
any; but as this commission is nothing to our present purpose, we shall
not burthen the reader with it.

With these two commissions he sailed out of Plymouth in May, 1696, in
the Adventure galley, of 30 guns, and 80 men; the place he first
designed for was New-York; in his voyage thither he took a French
banker, but this was no act of piracy, he having a commission for that
purpose, as we have just observed.

When he arrived at New-York, he put up articles for engaging more hands,
it being necessary to his ship’s crew, since he proposed to deal with a
desperate enemy. The terms he offered were, that every man should have a
share of what was taken, reserving for himself and owners forty shares.
Upon which encouragement he soon increased his company to 155 men.

With this company he sailed first for Madeira, where he took in wine and
some other necessaries; from thence he proceeded to Bonavista, one of
the Cape-de-Verd Islands, to furnish the ship with salt, and from thence
went immediately to St. Jago, another of the Cape-de-Verd Islands, in
order to stock himself with provisions. When all this was done, he bent
his course to Madagascar, the known rendezvous of pirates. In his way he
fell in with Capt. Warren, commodore of three men of war: he acquainted
him with his design, kept them company two or three days, and then
leaving them, made the best of his way for Madagascar, where he arrived
in February, 1696, just nine months from his departure from Plymouth.

It happened that at this time the pirate ships were most of them out in
search of prey; so that according to the best intelligence Capt. Kidd
could get, there was not one of them at that time about the island:
wherefore, having spent some time in watering his ship and taking in
more provisions, he thought of trying his fortune on the coast of
Malabar, where he arrived in the month of June following, four months
from his reaching Madagascar. Hereabouts he made an unsuccessful cruise,
touching sometimes at the island of Mohila, and sometimes at that of
Johanna, between Malabar and Madagascar. His provisions were every day
wasting, and his ship began to want repair: wherefore, when he was at
Johanna, he found means of borrowing a sum of money from some Frenchmen
who had lost their ship, but saved their effects, and with this he
purchased materials for putting his ship in good repair.

It does not appear all this while that he had the least design of
turning pirate; for near Mohila and Johanna both, he met with several
Indian ships richly laden, to which he did not offer the least violence,
though he was strong enough to have done what he pleased with them; and
first outrage or depredation I find he committed upon mankind, was after
his repairing his ship, and leaving Johanna; he touched at a place
called Mabbee, upon the Red Sea, where he took some Guinea corn from the
natives, by force. After this, he sailed to Bab’s Key, a place upon a
little island at the entrance of the Red Sea. Here it was that he first
began to open himself to his ship’s company, and let them understand
that he intended to change his measures; for, happening to talk of the
Mocha fleet, which was to sail that way, he said, _We have been
unsuccessful hitherto; but courage, my boys, we’ll make our fortunes out
of this fleet_; and finding that none of them appeared averse to it, he
ordered a boat out, well manned, to go upon the coast to make
discoveries, commanding them to take a prisoner and bring to him, or get
intelligence any way they could. The boat returned in a few days,
bringing him word, that they saw fourteen or fifteen ships ready to
sail, some with English, some with Dutch, and some with Moorish colours.

We cannot account for this sudden change in his conduct, otherwise than
by supposing that he first meant well while he had hopes of making his
fortune by taking of pirates; but now weary of ill success, and fearing
lest his owners, out of humour at their great expenses, should dismiss
him, and he should want employment, and be marked out for an unlucky
man; rather, I say, than run the hazard of poverty, he resolved to do
his business one way, since he could not do it another.

He therefore ordered a man continually to watch at the mast head, lest
this fleet should go by them; and about four days after, towards
evening, it appeared in sight, being convoyed by one English and one
Dutch man of war. Kidd soon fell in with them, and getting into the
midst of them, fired at a Moorish ship which was next him; but the men
of war taking the alarm, bore down upon Kidd, and firing upon him,
obliged him to sheer off, he not being strong enough to contend with
them. Now he had begun hostilities, he resolved to go on, and therefore
he went and cruised along the coast of Malabar. The first prize he met
was a small vessel belonging to Aden: the vessel was Moorish, and the
owners were Moorish merchants, but the master was an Englishman; his
name was Parker. Kidd forced him and a Portuguese that was called Don
Antonio, which were all the Europeans on board, to take on with him; the
first he designed as a pilot, and the last as an interpreter. He also
used the men very cruelly, causing them to be hoisted up by the arms,
and drubbed with a naked cutlass, to force them to discover whether they
had money on board, and where it lay; but as they had neither gold nor
silver on board, he got nothing by his cruelty; however, he took from
them a bale of pepper, and a bale of coffee, and so let them go.

[Illustration: Kidd’s Engagement with the Fleet.       Page 62.]

A little time after he touched a Carawar, a place upon the same coast,
where, before he arrived, the news of what he had done to the Moorish
ship had reached them; for some of the English merchants there had
received an account of it from the owners who corresponded with them;
wherefore, as soon as Kidd came in, he was suspected to be the person
who committed this piracy; and one Mr. Harvey and Mr. Mason, two of the
English factory, came on board and asked for Parker, and Antonio, the
Portuguese; but Kidd denied that he knew any such persons, having
secured them both in a private place in the hold, where they were kept
for seven or eight days, that is, till Kidd sailed from thence.

However, the coast was alarmed, and a Portuguese man of war was sent out
to cruise. Kidd met with her, and fought her about six hours, gallantly
enough; but finding her too strong to be taken he quitted her; for he
was able to run away from her when he would. Then he went to a place
called Porca, where he watered the ship, and bought a number of hogs of
the natives to victual his company.

Soon after this, he came up with a Moorish ship, the master whereof was
a Dutchman, called Schipper Mitchell, and chased her under French
colours, which they observing, hoisted French colours too; when he came
up with her, he hailed her in French, and they having a Frenchman on
board, answered him in the same language; upon which he ordered them to
send their boat on board; they were obliged to do so, and having
examined who they were, and from whence they came, he asked the
Frenchman, who was a passenger, if he had a French pass for himself; the
Frenchman gave him to understand that he had. Then he told the Frenchman
he must pass for captain, and by ——, says he, you are the captain: the
Frenchman durst not refuse doing as he would have him. The meaning of
this was, that he would seize the ship as fair prize, and as if she had
belonged to French subjects, according to a commission he had for that
purpose; though, one would think, after what he had already done, that
he need not have recourse to a quibble to give his actions a colour.

In short, he took the cargo, and sold it some time after; yet still he
seemed to have some fears upon him, lest these proceedings should have a
bad end; for, coming up with a Dutch ship some time after, when his men
thought of nothing but attacking her, Kidd opposed it; upon which a
mutiny arose, and the majority being for taking the said ship, and
arming themselves to man the boat to go and seize her, he told them,
such as did, never should come on board him again; which put an end to
the design, so that he kept company with the said ship some time,
without offering her any violence. However, this dispute was the
occasion of an accident, upon which an indictment was after wards
grounded against Kidd; for Moor, the gunner, being one day upon deck,
and talking with Kidd, about the said Dutch ship, some words arose
between them, and Moor told Kidd, that he had ruined them all; upon
which, Kidd, calling him a dog, took up a bucket and struck him with it,
which breaking his scull, he died the next day.

But Kidd’s penitential fit did not last long, for coasting along
Malabar, he met with a great number of boats, all which he plundered.
Upon the same coast he also fell in with a Portuguese ship, which he
kept possession of a week, and then having taken out of her some chests
of India goods, thirty jars of butter, with some wax, iron, and a
hundred bags of rice, he let her go.

Much about the same time he went to one of the Malabar islands for wood
and water, and his cooper being ashore, was murdered by the natives;
upon which Kidd himself landed, and burnt and pillaged several of their
houses, the people running away; but having taken one, he caused him to
be tied to a tree, and commanded one of his men to shoot him; then
putting to sea again he took the greatest prize which fell into his
hands while he followed this trade: this was a Moorish ship of 400 tons,
richly laden, named the Queda Merchant, the master whereof was an
Englishman, by the name of Wright; for the Indians often make use of
English or Dutchmen to command their ships, their own mariners not being
so good artists in navigation. Kidd chased her under French colours, and
having come up with her, he ordered her to hoist out her boat, and to
send on board of him, which being done, he told Wright he was his
prisoner; and informing himself concerning the said ship, he understood
there were no Europeans on board, except two Dutch, and one Frenchman,
all the rest being Indians or Armenians, and that the Armenians were
part owners of the cargo. Kidd gave the Armenians to understand, that if
they would offer any thing that was worth his taking for their ransom,
he would hearken to it. Upon which, they proposed to pay him 20,000
rupees, not quite £3000 sterling; but Kidd judged this would be making a
bad bargain, wherefore he rejected it, and setting the crew on shore, at
different places on the coast, he soon sold as much of the cargo as came
to ten thousand pounds. With part of it he also trafficked, receiving in
exchange provisions, or such other goods as he wanted; by degrees he
disposed of the whole cargo, and when the division was made, it came to
about £200 a man; and having reserved forty shares to himself, his
dividend amounted to about £8000 sterling.

The Indians along the coast came on board and trafficked with all
freedom, and he punctually performed his bargains, till about the time
he was ready to sail; and then thinking he should have no further
occasion for them, he made no scruple of taking their goods, and setting
them on shore without any payment in money or goods, which they little
expected; for as they had been used to deal with pirates, they always
found them men of honour in the way of trade; a people, enemies to
deceit, and that scorned to rob but in their own way.

Kidd put some of his men on board the Queda Merchant, and with this ship
and his own, sailed for Madagascar. As soon as he had arrived and cast
anchor, there came on board of him a canoe, in which were several
Englishmen, who had formerly been well acquainted with Kidd. As soon as
they saw him they saluted him, and told him, they were informed he was
come to take them, and hang them, which would be a little unkind in such
an old acquaintance. Kidd soon dissipated their doubts, by swearing he
had no such design, and that he was now in every respect their brother,
and just as bad as they; and calling for a cup of bombo, drank their
captain’s health.

These men belonged to a pirate ship, called the Resolution, formerly the
Mocha Merchant, whereof one Capt. Culliford was commander, and which lay
at anchor not far from them. Kidd went on board with them, promising
them his friendship and assistance, and Culliford in his turn came on
board of Kidd; and Kidd to testify his sincerity in iniquity, finding
Culliford in want of some necessaries, made him a present of an anchor
and some guns, to fit him out for sea again.

The Adventure galley was now so old and leaky, that they were forced to
keep two pumps continually going; wherefore Kidd shifted all the guns
and tackle out of her into the Queda Merchant, intending her for his man
of war; and as he had divided the money before, he now made a division
of the remainder of the cargo: soon after which, the greatest part of
the company left him, some going on board Capt. Culliford, and others
absconding into the country, so that he had not above 40 men left.

He put to sea, and happened to touch at Amboyna, one of the Dutch spice
islands, where he was told, that the news of his actions had reached
England, and that he was there declared a pirate.

The truth of it is, his piracies so alarmed our merchants, that some
motions were made in parliament, to inquire into the commission that was
given him, and the persons who fitted him out. These proceedings seemed
to lean a little hard upon Lord Bellamont, who thought himself so much
touched thereby, that he published a justification of himself in a
pamphlet, after Kidd’s execution. In a mean time it was thought
advisable, in order to stop the course of these piracies, to publish a
proclamation, offering the king’s free pardon to all such pirates as
should voluntarily surrender themselves, whatever piracies they had been
guilty of, at any time before the last day of April, 1699—that is to
say, for all piracies committed eastward of the Cape of Good Hope, to
the longitude and meridian of Socatora, and Cape Cormorin; in which
proclamation, Avery and Kidd were excepted by name.

When Kidd left Amboyna he knew nothing of this proclamation, for
certainly had he had notice of his being excepted in it, he would not
have been so infatuated, as to run himself into the very jaws of danger;
but relying upon his interest with the lord Bellamont, and fancying that
a French pass or two he found on board some of the ships he took, would
serve to countenance the matter, and that part of the booty he got would
gain him new friends—I say all these things made him flatter himself
that all would be hushed, and that justice would but wink at
him.—Wherefore he sailed directly for New-York, where he was no sooner
arrived, but by the Lord Bellamont’s orders, he was secured with all his
papers and effects. Many of his fellow-adventurers, who had forsook him
at Madagascar, came over from thence passengers, some to New-England and
some to Jersey; where hearing of the king’s proclamation for pardoning
of pirates, they surrendered themselves to the governor of those places.
At first they were admitted to bail, but soon after laid in strict
confinement, where they were kept for some time, till an opportunity
happened of sending them with their captain over to England to be tried.

Accordingly a sessions of admiralty being held at the Old Bailey, in
May, 1701, Capt. Kidd, Nicholas Churchill, James How, Robert Lumley,
William Jenkins, Gabriel Loff, Hugh Parrot, Richard Barlicorn, Abel
Owens, and Darby Mullins, were arraigned for piracy and robbery on the
high seas, and all found guilty except three: these were Robert Lumley,
William Jenkins, and Richard Barlicorn, who proving themselves to be
apprentices to some of the officers of the ship, and producing their
indentures in court, were acquitted.

The three above mentioned, though they were proved to be concerned in
taking and sharing the ship and goods mentioned in the indictment, yet,
as the gentlemen of the long robe rightly distinguished, there was a
great difference between their circumstances and the rest; for there
must go an intention of the mind and a freedom of the will to the
committing an act of felony or piracy. A pirate is not to be understood
to be under constraint, but a free agent; for in this case, the bare act
will not make a man guilty, unless the will make it so.

Now a servant, it is true, if he go voluntarily, and have his
proportion, he must be accounted a pirate, for then he acts upon his own
account, and not by compulsion; and these persons, according to the
evidence, received their part, but whether they accounted to their
masters for their shares afterwards, is the matter in question, and what
distinguishes them as free agents, or men that did go under the
compulsion of their masters, which being left to the consideration of
the jury, they found them _not guilty_.

Kidd was tried upon an indictment of murder also, viz. for killing Moor,
the gunner, and found guilty of the same. Nicholas Churchill, and James
How pleaded the king’s pardon, as having surrendered themselves within
the time limited in the proclamation, and Col. Bass, governor of
West-Jersey, to whom they surrendered, being in court, and called upon,
proved the same. However, this plea was over-ruled by the court, because
there being four commissioners named in the proclamation, viz. Capt.
Thomas Warren, Israel Hayes, Peter Delannoye, and Christopher Pollard,
Esqrs. who were appointed commissioners, and sent over on purpose to
receive the submission of such pirates as should surrender, it was
adjudged no other person was qualified to receive their surrender, and
that they could not be entitled to the benefit of the said proclamation,
because they had not in all circumstances complied with the conditions
of it.

Darby Mullins urged in his defence, that he served under the king’s
commission, and therefore could not disobey his commander without
incurring great punishments; that whenever a ship or ships went out upon
any expedition under the king’s commission, the men were never allowed
to call their officers to an account, why they did this, or why they did
that, because such a liberty would destroy all discipline: that if any
thing was done which was unlawful, the officers were to answer it, for
the men did no more than their duty in obeying orders. He was told by
the court, that acting under the commission justified in what was
lawful, but not in what was unlawful. He answered he stood in need of
nothing to justify him in what was lawful, but the case of seamen must
be very hard, if they must be brought into such danger for obeying the
commands of their officers, and punished for not obeying them, and if
they were allowed to dispute the orders, there could be no such thing as
command kept up at sea.

This seemed to be the best defence the thing could bear; but his taking
a share of the plunder, the seamen’s mutinying on board several times,
and taking upon them to control the captain, showed there was no
obedience paid to the commission; and that they acted in all things
according to the custom of pirates and free-booters, which weighing with
the jury, they brought him in guilty with the rest.

As to Capt. Kidd’s defence, he insisted much on his own innocence, and
the villany of his men. He said, he went out in a laudable employment
and had no occasion, being then in good circumstances, to go a pirating;
that the men often mutinied against him, and did as they pleased; that
he was threatened to be shot in the cabin, and that ninety-five left him
at one time, and set fire to his boat, so that he was disabled from
bringing his ship home, or the prizes he took, to have them regularly
condemned, which he said were taken by virtue of a commission under the
broad seal, they having French passes. The captain called one Col.
Hewson to his reputation, who gave him an extraordinary character, and
declared to the court, that he had served under his command, and been in
two engagements with him against the French, in which he fought as well
as any man he ever saw; that there were only Kidd’s ship and his own
against Monsieur du Cass, who commanded a squadron of six sail, and they
got the better of him. But this being several years before the facts
mentioned in the indictment were committed, proved of no manner of
service to the prisoner on his trial.

As to the friendship shown to Culliford, a notorious pirate, Kidd
denied, and said, he intended to have taken him, but his men being a
parcel of rogues and villains refused to stand by him, and several of
them ran away from his ship to the said pirate.—But the evidence being
full and particular against him, he was found guilty as before
mentioned.

When Kidd was asked what he had to say why sentence should not pass
against him, he answered, that _he had nothing to say, but that he had
been sworn against by perjured and wicked people_. And when sentence was
pronounced, he said, _my Lord, it is a very hard sentence. For my part,
I am the most innocent person of them all, only I have been sworn
against by perjured persons._

Wherefore about a week after, Capt. Kidd, Nicholas Churchill, James How,
Gabriel Loff, Hugh Parrot, Abel Owen, and Darby Mullins, were executed
at Execution Dock, and afterwards hung up in chains, at some distance
from each other, down the river, where their bodies hung exposed for
many years.


                              CAPTAIN TEW.

Before I enter on the adventures of this pirate I must take notice to
the reader of the reasons which made me not continue the life of Misson.

In reading the notes, which I have by me, relating to Capt. Tew, I found
him joined with Misson; and that I must be either guilty of repetition,
or give an account of Tew in Misson’s life, which is contrary to the
method I proposed, that of giving a distinct relation of every pirate
who has made any figure: and surely Tew, in point of gallantry, was
inferior to none, and may justly claim a particular account of his
actions. However, before I enter on the life of this pirate, I shall
continue that of Misson to the time that these two commanders met.

The blacks seeing them so much on their guard, brought out boiled rice
and fowls, and after they had satisfied their hunger, the chief made
signs that they were the same who had carried a negro to their ships,
and sent for the axe and piece of baize they had given him. While this
passed, the very negro came from hunting, who seemed overjoyed to see
them. The chief made signs that they might return, and ten negroes
coming to them, laden with fowls and kids, he gave them to understand,
they should accompany them to their ships with these presents. They
parted very amicably, and in hopes of settling a good correspondence
with these natives. All the houses were neatly framed and jointed, not
built from any foundation, but so made, that half a dozen men could lift
and transport them from place to place. The hunters, returning to their
ships, with these presents and negroes, were joyfully received; and the
negroes were not only caressed, but laden with baize, iron kettles, and
rum, besides the present of a cutlass for the chief.

While the negroes stayed, which was the space of three days, they
examined and admired the forts and growing town, in which all hands were
busied, and not even the prisoners excused.

As Misson apprehended no danger from the land, his fort, though of wood,
being, he thought, a sufficient defence to his infant colony, he took
160 hands, and went a second time on the coast of Zanguebar, and off
Quiloa he gave chase to a large ship which lay by for him. She proved an
over-match for the Victoire, which engaged her, with great loss of men,
near eight glasses; but finding he was more likely to be taken, than to
make a prize, by the advice of his officers and men, endeavoured to
leave the Portuguese, which was a 50 gun ship, and had 300 men on board;
but he found this attempt vain, for the Portuguese sailed as well as the
Victoire, and her commander, who was a resolute and brave man, seeing
him endeavour to shake him off, clapped him on board, but lost most of
the men he entered. Misson’s crew, not used to be attacked, and
expecting no quarter, fought so desperately, that they not only
thoroughly cleared their decks, but some of them followed the
Portuguese, who leaped into their own ship; which Misson seeing, hoped
to make an advantage of their despair, and crying out, _Elle est a nous,
a l’abordage_—_She’s our own, board, board her_—so many of his men
followed the few, that hardly were there enough left to work the ship.
Misson, observing the resolution of his men, grappled the Portuguese
ship, and leaped on board himself, crying out, _la mort, ou la
victoire_—_death or victory_. The Portuguese, who thought themselves in
a manner conquerors, seeing the enemy not only drive off those who
entered them, but board with such resolution, began to quit the decks in
spite of their officers. The captain and Misson met, as he was
endeavouring to hinder the flight of his men. They engaged with equal
bravery with their cutlasses: but Misson striking him on the neck, he
fell down the main hatch, which put an end to the fight, for the
Portuguese seeing their captain fall, threw down their arms, and called
for quarters, which was granted; and all the prisoners without
distinction being ordered between decks, and the powder rooms secured,
he put 35 men on board the prize, and made the best of his way to
Libertatia. This was the dearest prize he ever made, for he lost 56 men.
She was vastly rich in gold, having near £200,000 sterling on board,
being her own and the cargo of her companion, which was lost upon the
coast, of whose crew she had saved one hundred men out of 120, the rest
being lost by endeavouring to swim ashore. This was the reason that the
prize was so well manned, and proved so considerable.

Being within sight of Madagascar, they spied a sloop which stood for
them, and when in gun shot, threw out black colours, and fired a gun to
windward. Misson brought too, fired another to leeward, and hoisted out
his boat, which the sloop perceiving, lay by for. Misson’s lieutenant
went on board, and was received very civilly by Capt. Tew, who was the
commander, to whom the lieutenant gave a short account of their
adventures and new settlement, inviting him very kindly on board Capt.
Misson. Tew told him, he could not consent to go with him till he had
the opinion of his men. In the mean while, Misson coming along side,
hailed the sloop, and invited the captain on board, desiring his
lieutenant would stay as a hostage, if they were in the least jealous of
him, which they had no reason to be, since he was of force so much
superior, that he need not employ stratagem. This determined the company
on board the sloop, who advised their captain to go with the lieutenant,
whom they would not suffer to stay behind, to show the greater
confidence in their new friends.

My reader may be surprised that a single sloop should venture to give
chase to two ships of such countenance as were the Victoire and her
prize; but this wonder will cease, when he is acquainted with the
sequel.

Capt. Tew, after being handsomely regaled on board the Victoire, and
thoroughly satisfied, returned on board his sloop, gave an account of
what he had learned, and his men consenting, he gave orders to steer the
same course with Misson, whose settlement it was agreed to visit. I
shall here leave them to give an account of Capt. Tew.

Mr. Richier, governor of Bermuda, fitted out two sloops on the privateer
account, commanded by Capt. George Drew, and Capt. Thomas Tew, with
instructions to make the best of their way to the river Gambia, in
Africa, and there, with the advice and assistance of the agent for the
royal African company, to attempt the taking the French factory of Goree
on that coast.

The above commanders having their commissions and instructions from the
governor, took their departure from Bermuda, and kept company some time;
but Drew springing his mast, and a violent storm coming upon them, they
lost each other.

Tew being separated from his consort, thought of providing for his
future ease, by making one bold push; and accordingly, calling all hands
on deck, he spoke to them to this purpose.

“That they were not ignorant of the design with which the governor
fitted them out: the making and destroying the French factory; that he,
indeed, readily agreed to take a commission to this end, though contrary
to his judgment, because it was for the sake of being employed; but that
he thought it a very injudicious expedition, which, did they succeed in,
would be of no use to the public, and only be of advantage to a private
company of men, from whom they could expect no reward for their bravery;
that he could see nothing but danger in the undertaking, without the
least prospect of booty; that he could not suppose any man fond of
fighting for fighting’s sake; and few ventured their lives, but with
some view either of particular interest or public good: but here was not
the least appearance of either. Wherefore, he was of opinion, that they
should turn their thoughts on what might better their circumstances; and
if they were so inclined, he would undertake to shape a course which
should lead them to ease and plenty, in which they might pass the rest
of their days. That one bold push would do their business, and they
might return home, not only without danger, but even with reputation.”
The crew finding he expected their resolution, cried one, and all, “_A
gold chain or a wooden leg—we’ll stand by you_.”

Hearing this, he desired they would choose a quarter-master, who might
consult with him for the common good; which was accordingly done.

I must acquaint the reader, that on board the West-India privateers and
free-booters, the quarter-master’s opinion is like the Mufti’s among the
Turks: the captain can undertake nothing which the quarter-master does
not approve. We may say the quarter-master is a humble imitation of the
Roman tribune of the people; he speaks for, and looks after the interest
of the crew.

Tew, now, instead of proceeding on his voyage to Gambia, shaped his
course for the Cape of Good Hope, which doubling, he steered for the
straits of Babelmandel, entering into the Red Sea, where they came up
with a lofty ship bound from the Indies to Arabia; she was richly laden,
and as she was to clear the coasts of rovers, five more, extremely rich
(one especially in gold) being to follow her, she had 300 soldiers on
board, besides her seamen.

Tew, on making this ship, told his men she carried their fortunes, which
they would find no difficulty to take possession of; for though he was
satisfied she was full of men, and was mounted with a great number of
guns, they wanted the two things necessary, skill and courage: and,
indeed, so it proved, for he boarded and carried her without loss, every
one taking more care to run from danger, than to exert himself in the
defence of his goods.

In rummaging this prize, the pirates threw over a great many rich bales,
to search for gold, silver and jewels; and having taken what they
thought proper, together with the powder, part of which (as being more
than they could handsomely stow) they threw into the sea, they left her,
sharing £3000 sterling a man.

Encouraged by this success, Capt. Tew proposed going in quest of the
other five ships, of which he had intelligence from the prize; but the
quarter-master opposing him. He was obliged to drop the design, and
steer for Madagascar.

Here the quarter-master finding this island productive of all the
necessaries of life; and the air was wholesome, soil fruitful, and the
sea abounding with fish, proposed settling; but only three and twenty of
the crew came into the proposal: the rest stayed with Captain Tew, who
having given the new settlers their share of plunder, designed to return
to America, as they afterwards did; but spying, the Victoire and her
prize, he thought he might, by their means, return somewhat richer, and
resolved to speak with them, as I have already said.

Tew and his company having taken the above resolution of visiting
Monsieur Misson’s colony, arrived with him, and was not a little
surprised to see his fortifications.

When they came under the first fort, they saluted it with nine guns, and
were answered by an equal number. All the prisoners, at their coming to
an anchor, were suffered to come up, a privilege they had never before
granted them, on account of the few hands left them, except two or three
at a time.

[Illustration: The Victoire engages a Portuguese Ship.       Page 78.]

The joy those ashore expressed at the sight of so considerable a prize
as they judged her at first sight, was vastly allayed, when they heard
how dear a purchase she had proved to them. However, the reinforcement
of the sloop made some amends. Capt. Tew was received by Caraccioli and
the rest, with great civility and respect, who did not a little admire
his courage, both in attacking the prize he made, and afterwards in
giving chase to Misson. He was called to the council of officers, which
was immediately held, to consider what methods should be taken with the
prisoners, who were, by 190 brought in by this new prize, near as
numerous as those of his own party, though Tew joined them with 70 men.
It was therefore resolved to keep them separate from the Portuguese and
English, who were before taken, to make them believe they were in amity
with a prince of the natives, who was very powerful, and to propose to
them, at their choice, the assisting the new colony in their works, or
being sent prisoners up the country, if they rejected entering in with
them. Seventy-three took on, and the rest desired they might be any way
employed rather than be sent up the country; 117 then were set to work
upon a dock, which was laid out about half a mile above the mouth of the
harbour, and the other prisoners were forbid to pass such bounds as were
prescribed then on pain of death; lest they, knowing their own strength,
should revolt; for I must acquaint the reader, that on the arrival of
the Victoire, both their loss and the number of Portuguese they brought
in, was known to none but themselves, and the number of those who came
over, magnified; besides, the Johanna men were all armed and
disciplined, and the Bijoux lay as a guard-ship, where the last
prisoners were set to work; but while they provided for their security,
both within and without, they did not neglect providing also for their
support, for they dug and sowed a large plat of ground with Indian and
European corn, and other seeds which they found on board their prizes.
In the mean while, Caraccioli, who had the art of persuasion, wrought on
many of the Portuguese, who saw no hopes of returning home to join them.
Misson, who could not be easy in an inactive life, would have taken
another cruise; but fearing the revolt of the prisoners, durst not
weaken the colony by the hands he must necessarily take with him.
Wherefore, he proposed giving the last prize to, and sending away the
prisoners. Caraccioli and Capt. Tew were against it, saying, that it
would discover their retreat, and cause their being attacked by the
Europeans, who had settlements along the continent, before they were
able to defend themselves. Misson replied, he could not bear to be
always diffident of those about him; that it was better to die at once,
than live in continual apprehensions of death: that the time was come
for sending away the Johanna men, and that they could not go without a
ship; neither durst he trust a ship out, not well manned, nor man her
while so many prisoners were with him. Wherefore there was a necessity
of sending them off, or of putting them all to the sword; a barbarity by
which he would not purchase his security. A council was called, and what
Capt. Misson had proposed, agreed to. The prisoners were then summoned,
and he told them, in few words, that he knew the consequence of giving
them liberty; that he expected to be attacked as soon as the place of
his retreat was known, and had it in his hands by putting them to death,
to avoid the doubtful fate of war; but his humanity would not suffer him
to entertain a thought so cruel, and his alliances with the natives, he
hoped, would enable him to repel his assailants; but he required an oath
of every one, that he should not serve against him. He then inquired
into the circumstances of every particular man, and what they had lost,
all which he returned, telling the company it should be reckoned as part
of his share; and the prisoners, that he did not make war with the
oppressed, but the oppressors. The prisoners were charmed with this mark
of generosity, and wished he might never meet a treatment unworthy of
that he gave them. The ship victualled for a voyage to the coast of
Zanguebar, all her guns and ammunition taken out with the spare sails,
and spare rigging, all were ordered to be gone; and 137 departed, highly
applauding the behaviour of their enemies. All this while they had heard
nothing from the natives, nor had the hunting parties met with any of
them, which made Misson suspect they were afraid of his being their
neighbour, and had shifted their quarters; but as the Johanna men were
upon going away, there came about 50 negroes to them, driving about 100
head of black cattle, 20 negro men bound, and 25 women, for which cattle
and prisoners they bartered rum, hatchets, baize, and beads; some
hogsheads of which last commodity they had taken on the coast of Angola.
Here the negroes belonging to Misson were provided with wives: the
natives were caressed, and to the slaves signs made that their liberty
was given them; they were immediately clothed and put under the care of
as many whites, who, by all possible demonstrations, endeavoured to make
them understand that they were enemies to slavery. The natives stayed
ten days, which retarded the departure of the Johanna men; but, upon
their retiring, the Bijoux sailed with 100 of them on board, under the
command of Caraccioli’s lieutenant, who excused the keeping them longer
than was promised, and not bringing them at once, having no more than
two ships. The Portuguese ship, which was unrigged, being made a hulk,
the ten men of Misson’s company who had settled at Johanna, being
desirous to return, were brought to Libertatia with their wives (of
which they had two or three a piece) and their children. The Bijoux, at
two more voyages, carried over the rest of the Johannians.

Misson hove down the Bijoux, and resolving on a cruise on the coast of
Guinea, to strengthen his colony by the capture of some slaving ship, he
gave the command of her to Capt. Tew, and he and Caraccioli pressed the
work of the dock. He gave him also 200 hands, of which 40 were
Portuguese, 37 negroes, 17 of them expert sailors, 30 English, and the
rest French. Tew met with nothing in his way, till he came to the
northward of the Cape of Good Hope, when he fell in with a Dutch
East-India galley of 18 guns, which he took after a small resistance,
and with the loss of one man only. On the coast of Angola he took an
English Guinea-man with 240 slaves, men, women, and boys. The negroes
who had been before taken on this coast, found among these a great many
of their acquaintance, and several of their relations, to whom they
reported their unexpected change of fortune, the great captain (for so
they now called Misson) having humanely knocked off their chains, and of
slaves made them free men, and sharers in his fortunes: that the same
good fortune had attended them in their falling into his hands, for he
abhorred even the name of slavery. Tew, following the orders and
acquainted with the policy of Misson, ordered the fetters and handcuffs
to be taken off, upon his negro sailors assuring him they would not
revolt, and were sensible of their happiness in falling into his hands.
Content with these prizes, he made the best of his way home to
Libertatia where he arrived without any sinister accident; but I forgot
to tell my reader, that he set his Dutch prisoners (nine excepted, who
took on with him) ashore, about 30 miles to the northward of the Cape of
Saldanha Bay, where had been buried, by Capt. Misson, the English
commander. He found a great quantity of English crowns on board his
Dutch prize, which were carried into the common treasury; money being of
no use where every thing was in common, and no hedge bounded any
particular man’s property. The slaves he had released in this last
cruise were employed in perfecting the dock, and treated on the footing
of free people. They were not ignorant of the change of their condition,
and were therefore extremely diligent and faithful. A white man, or one
of the old standing negroes, wrought with every four, and made them
understand the French words (by often repetition, and the help of their
countrymen’s interpreting) used in their works Misson ordered a couple
of sloops to be built in a creek, of eighty tons each, which he mounted
with eight guns a piece, out of a Dutch prize. These were perfected in a
little time, and proved not only shapely vessels, but excellent sailers.
The officers of these sloops were chosen by balloting, and as their
first design was only to discover and lay down a chart of the coast,
sands, shoals, and depth of water round the island of Madagascar, the
schoolmaster being sent with the command of one, Tew desired and had the
other. They were manned, each sloop with 50 white and 50 black men:
which voyage round the island was of vast advantage in giving the new
released Angola negroes a notion of working a vessel;—and they were very
industrious both in endeavouring to learn the French language, and to be
useful. These sloops, the one of which was called the Childhood, and the
other the Liberty, were near four months on this expedition. In the mean
while, a few of the natives had come often to the settlement, and began
to speak a little French, mixed with the other European languages, which
they heard among Misson’s people, and six of the native families fixed
among them, which was of vast use to the planters of this colony; for
they made a very advantageous report to their countrymen of the
regularity and harmony they observed in them. The sloops having
returned, and an exact chart taken of the coast, Caraccioli had a mind
for a cruise. He proposed visiting all the neighbouring islands, and
accordingly went out to Mascarenhas, and the other islands near it,
taking one half of his crew of negroes, and returned with a Dutch prize,
which he took off the above mentioned island where they were about
fixing a colony. This prize, as it had on board all sorts of European
goods, and necessaries for settling, was more valuable than if it had
been vastly richer. The negroes growing useful hands, Misson resolved on
a cruise to the northward, encouraged by Tew’s success; and with all the
blacks, which he divided between the two ships, one of which Capt. Tew
commanded set out with 500 men. Off the coast of Arabia Felix they fell
in with a ship belonging to the Great Mogul, bound for Zidon, with
pilgrims to Mecca, who, with Moor mariners, made up the number of 1600
souls. This ship carried 110 guns, but made a very poor defence, being
encumbered with the goods and number of passengers they carried. The two
adventurers did not think it their business to cannonade, they therefore
boarded as soon as they came up with her, and the Moors no sooner saw
them entered, but they discharged one volley of small arms at random, we
may suppose, because no execution was done, and fled the decks. Being
masters of this ship, which did not cost them a single man, they
consulted what they should do with her, and the prisoners, and it was
resolved to set them ashore between Ain and Aden.

They now made the best of their way for Madagascar, putting 200 hands on
board the prize, which proved a very heavy sailer, and retarded them
very much. Off the Cape Guarde Fin they were overtaken with a cruel
storm, which was near wrecking them on the island called Irmanos; but
the wind coming about due north, they had the good luck to escape this
danger. Though the fury of the wind abated, yet it blew so hard for
twelve days together, that they could only carry their coursers reefed.
They spied a sail in their passage, but the weather would not permit
their endeavouring to speak with her. In a word, they returned to
Libertatia with their prize, without any other accident; but the captors
could make no estimate of her value, she having on board a vast quantity
of diamonds, besides rich silks, raw silks, spices, carpets, wrought and
bar gold. The prize was taken to pieces, as she was of no use; her
cordage and knee timber preserved, with all the bolts, eyes, chains, and
other iron work, and her guns planted on two points of the harbour,
where they raised batteries, so that they were now so strongly fortified
they apprehended no danger from any number of shipping which could be
brought into those seas to attack them. They had, by this time, cleared,
sown, and enclosed a good parcel of ground, and taken in a quantity of
pasturage, where they had above 300 head of black cattle, bought of the
natives. The dock was now finished, and the Victoire growing old and
unfit for a long voyage, and the last storm having shook, and loosened
her very much, she was pulled to pieces and rebuilt, keeping the same
name. She was rigged, victualled, and fit to go to sea, and was to sail
to the coast of Guinea for more negroes, when one of the sloops came in,
which had been sent out rather to exercise the negroes, than with any
view of making a prize, and brought word that five lofty ships chased
her into the bay, and stood for their harbour; that she judged them to
be Portuguese by their built, and 50 gun ships, full of men. This proved
the real truth. The alarm was given, the forts and batteries manned, and
every man stood to his arms. Misson took upon him the command of 100
negroes, who were well disciplined, (for every morning they had been
used to perform their exercise, which was taught them by a French
serjeant, one of their company, who belonged to the Victoire) to be
ready where his assistance should be required, Tew commanded all the
English. They had hardly ordered their affairs when these ships hove in
sight, and stood directly for the harbour with Portuguese colours. They
were warmly received by the two forts, which did not stop them, though
it brought one of them on the careen. They entered the harbour, and
thought they had done their business, but were saluted so warmly from
the forts, batteries, sloops, and ships, that two of them sunk
downright, and a great many men were drowned, though some got on board
the other ships. The Portuguese, who did not imagine they had been so
well fortified, and thought in passing the two forts they should without
difficulty land their men, and easily root out this nest of pirates,
found now their mistake, for they durst not venture to hoist out a boat.
They had wisely, however, contrived to enter just before the turn of the
tide. Finding the attempt vain, and that they had lost a great many men,
they clapped upon a wind, and with the help of the tide of ebb, made
more haste out than they did to get in, leaving two of their ships sunk
in the harbour; but they did not get off so cheaply, for no sooner were
they clear of the forts, but Misson, manning with the utmost expedition
both the ships and sloops, gave them chase, and engaged them at the
mouth of the bay. The Portuguese defended themselves with a great deal
of gallantry, and one of them beat off the Libertatians twice, who
boarded them from the two sloops; two of them, finding themselves hard
pressed made a running fight, and got off, and left the third to shift
as well as she could. The Bijoux and Victoire finding the Portuguese
endeavoured to clear themselves and knowing there was little to be got
by the captures, gave over the chase, and fell upon the third, who
defended himself till his decks swam with blood, and the greater number
of his men killed; but finding all resistance vain, and that he was left
to an unequal fight by his companions, he called for quarter, and good
quarter was given, both to himself and men. This prize yielded them a
great quantity of powder and shot, and, indeed, they expected nothing of
value out of her. None of the prisoners were stripped, and the officers,
Misson, Caraccioli, and Tew invited to their tables, treating them very
civilly, and extolling the courage they had shown in their defence.
Unhappily two prisoners were found on board, who had been released, and
had sworn never to serve against them; these were clapped in irons, and
publicly tried for their perjury. The Portuguese officers being present,
the witnesses proved them the very discharged men, and they were
condemned to be hanged at the point of each fort; which execution was
performed the next morning after their condemnation, with the assistance
of the Portuguese chaplain, who attended, confessed, and absolved them.
This was the engagement with the pirates, which made so much noise in
the Lisbon Gazette, and these the men whom the English ignorantly took
for Avery; who, we had a notion here in London, had 32 sail of men of
war, and had taken upon himself the state and title of king.

This execution seeming to impugn the maxims of the chiefs, Caraccioli
made an harangue, in which he told them, “that there was no rule could
be laid down which did not allow exceptions: that they were all sensible
how tender the Commodore Monsieur Misson was in shedding blood; and that
it was a tenet of his faith, that none had power over the life of
another, but God alone who gave it; but notwithstanding,
self-preservation sometimes made it absolutely necessary to take away
the life of another, especially an avowed and obliged enemy, even in
cold blood. As to the blood shed in a lawful war, in defence of that
liberty they had generously asserted, it was needless to say any thing,
but he thought it proper to lay before them reasons for the execution of
the criminals, and the heinousness of their crimes. They had not only
received their lives from the bounty of the Libertatians, but their
liberty, and had every thing restored them which they laid claim to;
consequently their ingratitude rose in proportion to the generous
treatment they had met with: that indeed, both he and Capt. Misson would
have passed by the perjury and ingratitude which they had been guilty
of, with a corporeal punishment, which had not extended to the
deprivation of life, but their gallant friend and companion, the English
commander, Capt. Tew, used such cogent reasons for an exemplary
punishment, to deter others from the like crimes, that they must have
been enemies to their own preservation in not following his advice: that
the lives of their whole body ought to be preferred to those of declared
and perjured enemies, who would not cease to endeavour their ruin; and,
as they were well acquainted with their settlement, might be fatal
instruments of it, if they were again restored to that liberty which
they had already abused: that he was obliged to do Capt. Tew the
justice, to acknowledge he was inclined to the side of mercy, till he
was thoroughly informed of the blackness of their ingratitude, and then
he thought it would be cruelty to themselves to let those miscreants
experience a second time their clemency. Thus an absolute necessity had
obliged them to act contrary to their declared principles; though, to
state the case rightly, these men, not the Libertarians, were the
authors of their own deaths.” Here the assembly crying out, “_their
blood is on their own heads, they sought their deaths, and hanging is
too good for them_;” Caraccioli gave over, and every one returned
satisfied to his private or the public affairs.

Some difference arising between Misson’s and Tew’s men, on a national
quarrel, which the latter began, Capt. Tew proposed their deciding the
quarrel by the sword; but Caraccioli was entirely against it, alleging,
that such decision must necessarily be a damage to the public, since the
brave men who fell, would be weakening of their colony. He therefore
desired Capt. Tew to interpose the authority he had over his crew, and
he and Misson would endeavour to bring their men to an amicable
agreement; and for the future, as this accident proved the necessity,
wholesome laws should be made, and a form of government entered upon.
Both parties were therefore called, and Caraccioli showed them the
necessity of their living in unity among themselves, who had the whole
world for enemies; and as he had a persuasive and insinuating way of
argument, with the assistance of Capt. Tew, this affair was ended to the
satisfaction of both parties.

The next day the whole colony was assembled, and the three commanders
proposed a form of government as necessary to their conservation; for
where there was no coercive laws, the weakest would always be the
sufferers, and every thing must tend to confusion: that men’s passions,
blinding them to justice, and making them ever partial to themselves,
they ought to submit the differences which might rise to calm and
disinterested persons who could examine with temper, and determine
according to reason and equity: that they looked upon a democratical
form, where the people were themselves the makers and judges of their
own laws, the most agreeable; and therefore, desired they would divide
themselves into companies of ten men, and every such company choose one
to assist in settling a form of government, and in making wholesome laws
for the good of the whole: that the treasure and cattle they were
masters of should be equally divided, and such lands as any particular
man would enclose, should, for the future, be deemed his property, which
no other should lay any claim to, if not alienated by a sale.

This proposal was received with applause, and they decimated themselves
that very day, but put off the meeting of the states till a house was
built, which they set about very cheerfully, and finished it in about a
fortnight; it being of framed timber, and they having among them a great
number who understood the handling of an axe.

When this body of politicians met, Caraccioli opened the sessions with a
handsome speech, showing the advantage flowing from order; and then
spoke to the necessity of lodging a supreme power in the hands of one
who should have that of rewarding brave and virtuous actions, and of
punishing the vicious, according to the laws which the state should
make; by which he was to be guided: that such a power, however, should
not be for life, nor be hereditary, but determine at the end of three
years, when a new choice should be made by the state, or the old
confirmed for three years longer; by which means, the ablest men would
always be at the head of affairs, and their power being of short
duration, none would dare to abuse it: that such a chief should have the
title of _Lord Conservator_, and all the ensigns of royalty to attend
him.

This was approved _nem. con._ and Misson was chosen conservator, with
power to create great officers, &c. and with the title of _Supreme
Excellence_.

A law was then made for the meeting of the State once every year at
least, but oftener, if the conservator and his council thought it
necessary for the common good to convene them; and that nothing of
moment should be undertaken without the approbation of the State.

In a word their first session lasted ten days; and a great many
wholesome laws were enacted, registered in the state book, and dispersed
among the crews.

Capt. Tew, the conservator honoured with the title of Admiral, and
Caraccioli was made Secretary of State. He chose a council of the ablest
among them, without distinction of nation or colour; and the different
languages began to be incorporated, and one made out of the many. An
equal division was made of their treasure and cattle, and every one
began either to enclose land for himself, or his neighbour who would
hire his assistance.

Admiral Tew proposed building an arsenal, and augmenting their naval
force. The first was agreed to be proposed to the State at the next
convention; but the latter was thought unnecessary, till the number of
inhabitants was augmented; for, should they all be employed in the sea
service, the husbandry would be neglected, which would be of fatal
consequence to the growing colony.

The Admiral then proposed the fetching in those Englishmen who had
followed the quarter-master; but the council rejected this, alleging,
that as they deserted their captain, it was a mark of a mutinous temper,
and they might infect others with a spirit of disorder; that, however,
they might have notice given them of the settlement, and if they made it
their earnest entreaty to be admitted, and would desert the
quarter-master, it should be granted as a particular favour done them,
at the instance of the Admiral, and upon his engaging his parole of
honour for their quiet behaviour.

The Admiral then desired he might take a cruise; that he hoped to meet
with some East-India ships, and bring in some volunteers, for the number
of subjects being the riches of a nation, he thought the colony stood
more in need of men, than of any thing else; that he would lie in the
way of the Cape, and did not question doing good service; and as he went
to the northward, would call upon his own men.

The Victoire was according to the Admiral’s desire fitted out, and in a
few days he sailed with 300 men on board. He came to an anchor at the
settlement his men had made, hoisted an English ensign in his fore
shrouds, and fired a gun; but after he had waited some time, perceiving
no signal from the shore, he landed and sent back his boat. Soon after
the boat returned towards the ship, two of his men came up to him, to
whom he gave an account of Misson’s settlement. They invited him into
the wood to see that of theirs, and to advise with their companions,
about the proposed migration. The governor, alias quarter-master,
received him mighty civilly, but told him, that he could see no
advantage to themselves in changing their present situation, though they
might prove a great one to the new colony, by adding to their force so
many brave fellows: that they there enjoyed all the necessaries of life;
were free and independent of all the world; and it would be madness
again to subject themselves to any government, which, however mild,
still exerted some power. That he was governor for three months, by the
choice of his companions; but his power extended no farther than to the
judging in matters of small difference which might arise, which he hoped
to do impartially while his authority continued; that they had agreed
among themselves, and confirmed that agreement by oath to support the
decrees of the governor for the time, that their tranquility might not
be disturbed by the humour of any one man: and that this power of
determining, was to devolve at the expiration of three months, to him on
whom the lot should fall by balloting, provided he had not before
enjoyed the honour, for such a one was not to draw; by which agreement,
every one would be raised, in time, to the supreme command, which
prevented all canvassing and making interest for votes, as when
determined by suffrage; left no opening for making divisions and
parties, and was a means to continue to them that repose inseparable
from an unity among themselves. However, continued he, “if you will go
to America or Europe, and show the advantage which may accrue to the
English, by fixing a colony here, out of that love we bear our country,
and to wipe away the odious appellation of pirates, with pleasure we
will submit to any who shall come with a commission from a lawful
government; but it is ridiculous to think we will become subjects to
greater rogues than ourselves.”

Capt. Tew finding the quarter-master spoke the sentiments of his
companions, took leave, and returned to his ship: but went on shore
again in the evening, the wind not serving to weigh, it blowing due
west. He asked the governor how he got acquainted with the natives? He
answered, by meeting them a hunting, and using them well: that he
wheedled one of them down to their huts, the fellow being alone, and
they three in company, he supposed, thought it best to go with seeming
willingness. After him several came, and they lived very friendly with
them. The captain, had brought ashore with him some rum and brandy, and
they were drinking a bowl of punch, when on a sudden, a violent storm
arose. Capt. Tew ran to the shore, and made a signal for his boat to
carry him off, but the sea ran too high to venture out of the ship. The
storm all the while increased, and the Victoire, in less than two hours,
parting her cables, was driven ashore where it was very steep, and
perished, with all her men, in Capt. Tew’s sight.

The captain stayed with his old companions, without knowing which way to
return to his friends he had left with Misson, not one of whom was
(luckily for them,) on board the ship. At the end of three months they
saw a large ship, which Tew believed was the Bijoux; but she took no
notice of the fires they made. As he expected she would return after a
short cruise, he, and his companions, made large fires every night on
the shore, and visited the coast very often. About a month after this,
as they came early to the sea-side, they were surprised at the sight of
two sloops which lay at anchor, about a cannon shot from the shore. They
had not been long looking upon them, when a canoe was hoisted out of
one, and made to them, with six men who rowed, and one sitter.

Tew soon knew him to be Capt. Misson. He came ashore, and embracing the
former, told him, all their proposed happiness was vanished; for without
the least provocation given, in the dead of the night, the natives came
down upon them in two great bodies, and made a great slaughter, without
distinction of age or sex, before they could put themselves in a posture
of defence; that Caraccioli (who died in the action) and he, got what
men together they could, to make a stand; but finding all resistance
vain against such numbers, he made a shift to secure a considerable
quantity of rough diamonds and bar gold, and to get on board the two
sloops with 45 men: that the Bijoux being gone to cruise, and the number
of men he had carried with him in the Victoire, had weakened the colony,
and given the natives the boldness to attack them, but for what reason
he could not imagine.

Tew gave him an account of the disaster which had happened, and after
having mutually condoled their misfortunes, Tew proposed their going to
America, where Misson might, with the riches he had, pass his life
unknown, and in a comfortable manner. Misson answered he could not yet
take any resolution, though he had thoughts of returning to Europe, and
privately visiting his family, if any were alive, and then retire from
the world. They dined with the quarter-master, who pressed their return
to America, to procure a commission for the settling a colony. Misson
told Tew, he should have one of the sloops, and what volunteers would
keep him company, for his misfortunes had erased all thoughts of future
settlements; that what riches they had saved, he would distribute
equally, nay, he would be content, if he had only a bare support left
him. On this answer, four of the quarter-master’s company offered to
join Capt. Tew.

In the afternoon they visited both sloops, and Misson putting the
question to the men, 30 went on board of one sloop, though they parted
with great reluctance from their old commander; and 15 stayed with
Misson. The four men who joined Tew made the number of his crew 34: they
stayed about a week, in hopes of the Bijoux’s return upon the coast; but
she not appearing, they set sail, Captain Misson having first shared the
treasure, with Tew and his other friends and companions, hoping to meet
the Bijoux on the Guinea coast, for which they shaped their course. Off
Cape Infantes, they were overtaken with a storm, in which the unhappy
Misson’s sloop went down, within musket shot of Capt. Tew, who could
give him no assistance.

Tew continued his course for America, and arrived at Rhode-Island
without any accident. His men dispersed themselves, as they thought fit,
and Tew sent to Bermuda for his owner’s account, fourteen times the
value of their sloop; and not being questioned by any, lived in great
tranquillity. The French belonging to Misson, took different routes, one
of whom dying at Rochelle, the French manuscript of Misson’s life was
found among his papers, and transmitted to me by a friend and
correspondent.

Capt. Tew lived unquestioned. He had an easy fortune, and designed to
live quietly at home; but those of his men, who lived near him, having
squandered their shares, were continually soliciting him to take another
trip. He withstood their request a considerable time; but they having
got together (by the report they made of the vast riches to be acquired)
a number of resolute fellows, they, in a body, begged him to head them
but for one voyage. They were so earnest in their desire, that he could
not refuse complying. They prepared a small sloop, and made the best of
their way to the straits entering the Red Sea, where they met with, and
attacked a ship belonging to the Great Mogul in the engagement, a shot
carried away the rim of Tew’s belly, who held his bowels with his hands
some small space. When he dropped, it struck such a terror in his men,
that they suffered themselves to be taken, without further resistance.


                          CAPTAIN JOHN HALSEY.

John Halsey was a Boston man, of New-England, commanded the Charles,
brigantine, and went out with a commission from the governor, to cruise
on the banks of Newfoundland, where he took a French banker, which he
appointed to meet him at Fayal; but missing his prize here, he went
among the Canary Islands, where he took a Spanish barcalonga, which he
plundered and sunk: from thence he went to the island of Bravo, one of
the Cape-de-Verds, where he wooded and watered, turned ashore his
lieutenant, and several of his men here running away from him, the
governor sent them on board again, his commission being as yet in force.
From hence he stood away to the southward, and doubling the Cape of Good
Hope, made for Madagascar and the bay of Augustin, where he took in wood
and water, with some straggling seamen, who were cast away in the
Degrave Indiamen, Capt. Young, commander. After this, he shaped his
course for the Red Sea, and met with a Dutchman of 60 guns, coming from
Mocha, whom he kept company with a week. Though he was resolved upon
turning pirate, he intended to rob only the Moor ships, which occasioned
a dispute between him and his men; they insisting on the ship’s being a
Moor, and he asserting she was Dutch, was positive in his resolve of
meddling with no European ships. The men were for boarding, but his
obstinacy not being to be conquered, they broke Halsey and his gunner,
confined both, and were ready to board the Dutchman, when one of the
crew perceiving he was about to run out his lower tier, knocked down the
quarter-master (whose business it is to be at the helm, in time of chase
or engagement, according to the rules of pirates) clapped the helm hard
aweather, and wore the brigantine. The Dutchman stayed, and fired a
shot, which taking a swivel gun, carried it aft, narrowly missed the man
at helm, and shattered the taffarel. The men perceiving they had caught
a Tartar, made the best of their way to shake her off, and some were
running down between decks, whom the surgeon pricked up again with his
sword, though he was no way consenting to their designed piracy. The
captain and gunner were again reinstated after they had seen their
mistake, and then they steered for the Nicobar Islands, where they met
with a country ship, called the Buffalo, commanded by Capt. Buckley, an
Englishman, coming from Bengal, which they took after a short engagement
there being only three Europeans on board, the captain and two mates;
the rest were Moors. This ship fell seasonably in their way, she being
bound for Achen, with butter, rice, and cloth, and the pirates, at that
time, were in great straits both for provision and clothing. They took
the two mates to sea with them, but left the captain and the Moors at
Cara Nicobar, at an anchor, and then took a cruise. Capt. Buckley, who
was sick, died before their return. In the cruise they met Captain
Collins, in a country sloop, bound also to Achen. He had also two
English mates with him, but the rest of his company consisted of Moors.
Him they carried to the same harbour where they left the Buffalo.

Here a dispute arose among the pirates. Some were for returning to the
West-Indies, others were against it, for they had got no money, and that
was what engaged their search. They parted upon this; one part went on
board the Buffalo, made one Rowe captain, and Myers, a Frenchman,
master, whom they had picked up at Madagascar. The sloop’s deck they
ripped up, and mended with it the bottom of the brigantine which Halsey
still commanded. The ship shaped her course for Madagascar, and the
brigantine made for the straits of Malacca, to lie in the track of the
Manilla ships. I must observe, that Capt. Buckley’s two mates, whom they
intended to force with them, were by strength of entreaty, permitted to
go away with a canoe. In these straits, they met an European built ship,
of 26 guns, which they had not the courage to attack, being soured by
the Dutchman. They afterwards stood in shore, and came to an anchor. A
few days after they made a vessel, which they supposed a China junk, and
gave chase, but when they came pretty nigh, notwithstanding the pilot
assured them she was what they supposed, they swore it was a Dutchman,
and would not venture upon him; so leaving off their chase they stood in
shore, and came again to an anchor under the peninsula. They lay here
some days, and then spied a tall vessel, which they chased, and which
proved to be the Albemarle East-Indiamen, Capt. Bews, commander, coming
from China. They came up with him, but thinking it too warm a ship after
exchanging a few shot, the brigantine made off, and the Albemarle chased
in her turn. They however got clear, having a better share of heels, and
came again to an anchor. Having not above 40 hands, the water growing
scarce, and not daring to venture ashore for fear of the Dutch, a
council was called, and it was resolved to make the best of their way to
Madagascar, to pick up more hands, refresh, and set out on new
adventures. Pursuant to this resolution, they steered for that island,
but fell in their way on Mascarenhas, where, making a small present to
the governor, they were supplied with what they wanted. From hence they
went to a place on Madagascar, called by the pirates Hopeful Point; by
the natives, Harangby, near the island of St. Mary’s in the lat. of 17,
40, S. where they met with the Buffalo, and the Dorothy, a prize, made
by Capt. Thomas White and his company, being about 90 or 100 men,
settled near the same place, in petty governments of their own, having
some of them 5 or 600, some 1000 negro subjects, who acknowledged their
sovereignty. Here they again repaired their brigantine, took in
provisions and all necessaries, augmented their company to about 100
men, and set out for the Red Sea. They touched at Johanna, and there
took in a quantity of goats and cocoa nuts for fresh provisions, and
thence in eleven days reached the Straits of Babelmandel. They had not
cruised here many days, when they spied the Moorish fleet from Mocha and
Jufa, consisting of 25 sail, which they fell in with, and had been
taken, if their oars had not helped them off, it falling a dead calm.
They had not apprehended the danger so great, if they had not judged
these ships convoyed by some Portuguese men of war. Some days after
this, they met a one mast vessel, called a grab, coming from Mocha,
which they spied within gun-shot in a thick fog: they fired a shot which
cut her halliards, and then took possession of her with their boats. She
was laden with drugs, but they took only some necessaries and 2000
dollars; and having learned that four English vessels lay at Mocha, of
which one was from Jufa, they let her go.

Three days after they spied the four ships, which they at first took to
be the trees of Babelmandel. At night they fell in with, and kept them
company till morning, the trumpets sounding on both sides all the time,
for the pirate had two on board as well as the English. When it was
clear day, the four ships drew into a line, for they had hailed the
pirate, who made no ceremony of owning who he was, by an answering
according to their manner, _From the seas_. The brigantine bore up till
she had slung her gaff. One of the ships perceiving this, advised Capt.
Jago, who led the van, in a ship of 24 guns and 70 men, to give chase,
for the pirate was on the run; but a mate, who was acquainted with the
way of working among pirates, answered he would find his mistake, and
said he had seen many a warm day, but feared this would be the hottest.
The brigantine turned up again, and coming astern, clapped the Rising
Eagle aboard, a ship of 16 guns, and the sternmost. Though they entered
their men, the Rising Eagle held them a warm dispute for three quarters
of an hour, in which Capt. Chamberlain’s chief mate and several others
were killed, the purser was wounded, jumped overboard and drowned. In
the mean while the other ships called to Capt. Jago to board the pirate;
who bearing away to clap him aboard, the pirate gave him a shot, which
raked him fore and aft, and determined Capt. Jago to get out of danger;
for he run away with all the sail he could pack, though he was fitted
out to protect the coast against pirates. His example was followed by
the rest, every one steering a different coast. Thus they became masters
of the Rising Eagle. I cannot but take notice, that the second mate of
the Rising Eagle, after quarters were called for, fired from out the
forecastle, and killed two of the pirates, one of whom was the gunner’s
consort, who would have revenged his death by shooting the mate, but
several Irish and Scots, together with one Captain Thomas White, once a
commander among the pirates, but then a private man, interposed and
saved him, in regard that he was an Irishman. They examined the
prisoners to know which was the ship from Jufa, that had money on board;
and having learned it was the Essex, they gave chase, came up with her,
hoisted the bloody flag at the main-mast-head, fired one single gun, and
she struck, though she was fitted for close quarters, and there was not
on board the brigantine above 20 hands, and the prize was astern so far,
that her top-mast scarce appeared out of the water. In chasing this
ship, they passed the other two, who held the fly of their ensigns in
their hands ready to strike. When the ship had struck, the captain of
her asked, who commanded the brigantine? He was answered, Capt. Halsey.
Asking again, who was quarter-master? He was told Nathaniel North, to
whom he called, as he knew him very well. North, learning his name was
Punt, said, _Capt. Punt, I am sorry you are fallen into our hands_. He
was civilly treated, and nothing belonging to himself or the English
gentlemen, who were passengers, touched, though they made bold to lay
hands on £40,000 in money, belonging to the ship. They had about £10,000
in money out of the Rising Eagle. They discharged the Essex, and with
the other prize and the brigantine, steered for Madagascar, where they
arrived and shared their booty. Some of the passengers, who had been so
well treated, came afterwards with a small ship from India (with license
from the governor of Madras) called the Greyhound, laden with
necessaries, in hopes to barter with the pirates for the dry goods they
had taken, and recover them at an easy rate. They were received very
kindly, an invoice of their goods was asked, the goods agreed for,
shared and paid in money and bale goods. In the mean while came in a
ship from Scotland, called the Neptune, 26 guns, 54 men, commanded by
Capt. Miller, with a design to slave, and to go thence to Batavia to
dispose of her negroes (having a supercargo on board, brought up among
the Dutch) and thence to Malacca, to take on board the cargo of a ship,
called the Speedwell, lost on her return from China; but finding here
another ship trading with the pirates, and having many necessaries,
French brandy, Madeira wine, and English stout on board, Capt. Miller
thought it better to trade for money than slaves. The merchants of the
Greyhound, nettled to see any but themselves take money, for the pirates
never haggled about a price, told them, _They could not do the governor
of Madras a more grateful piece of service than to make prize of the
Neptune, which was a ship fit for that purpose_. To which some of the
Scotch and Irish answered, _They had not best put such a design on foot,
for if the company once got it into their heads to take one, they would
go nigh to take both ships_. In a short time after came on a hurricane,
which obliged the Neptune to cut away all her masts, and lost the three
ships belonging to the pirates, which was their whole fleet. They having
now no ship, and several of them no money, having been stripped at play,
their thoughts were bent on the Neptune. The chief mate of her, Daniel
Burgess, who had a spleen to the captain, joining privately with the
pirates (among whom he died) got all the small masts and yards ashore;
and the pirates being requested to find him proper trees for masting,
told Capt. Miller they had found such as would serve his turn, desiring
he would take a number of hands ashore to get them down to the water,
which (he suspecting no harm) accordingly did, and he and his men were
seized, and the long-boat detained ashore. The captain was forced to
send for the second mate, and afterwards for the gunner; the mate, who
was the captain’s brother, went, but the gunner, suspecting foul play,
refused. In the evening, Burgess came on board, and advised the
surrender of the ship, which, though but sixteen were left on board,
they scrupled, and proposed going under the cover of their own guns to
fetch their top-mast and yards, and with them put to sea; but the chief
mate, Burgess, whose villany was not then known, persuaded them to give
up a ship they could neither defend nor sail; which was no small
satisfaction to the Greyhound, little thinking how soon they would meet
with the same treatment; for two days after, the pirates manned the
Neptune’s pinnace, seized the Greyhound, took away all the money they
had paid, and shifting out of the Neptune ten pipes of Madeira, with two
hogsheads of brandy, into the Greyhound, and putting on board the
captain, second mate, boatswain and gunner of the Neptune, and about
fourteen of her hands, ordered her to sea. The rest of the Neptune’s
company being young men fit for their purpose, they detained, most of
whom, by hard drinking, fell into distempers and died. As to Capt.
Halsey, while the Scotch ship was fitting, he fell ill of a fever, died
and was buried with great solemnity and ceremony; the prayers of the
church of England was read over him, colours were flying, and his sword
and pistol laid on his coffin, which was covered with a ship’s jack; as
many minute guns fired as he was years old, viz. 46, and three English
volleys, and one French volley of small arms. He was brave in his
person, courteous to all his prisoners, lived beloved, and died
regretted by his own people. His grave was made in a garden of
water-melons, and fenced in with palisades to prevent his being rooted
up by the wild hogs, of which there are plenty in those parts.

P. S. The Neptune seized as above, was the year after Capt. Halsey’s
death, ready to go to sea; but a hurricane happening, she was lost, and
proved the last ship that gang of pirates ever got possession of.


                         CAPTAIN THOMAS WHITE.

He was born at Plymouth, where his mother kept a public house. She took
great care of his education, and when he was grown up, as he had an
inclination to the sea, procured him the king’s letter. After he had
served some years on board a man of war, he went to Barbadoes, where he
married, got into the merchant service, and designed to settle in the
island. He had the command of the Marygold brigantine given him, in
which he made two successful voyages to Guinea and back to Barbadoes. In
his third, he had the misfortune to be taken by a French pirate, as were
several other English ships, the masters and inferior officers of which
they detained, being in want of good artists. The brigantine belonging
to White, they kept for their own use, and sunk the vessel they before
sailed in; but meeting with a ship on the Guinea coast more fit for
their purpose, they went on board her, and burnt the brigantine.

It is not my business here to give an account of this French pirate, any
farther than Capt. White’s story obliges me, though I beg leave to take
notice of their barbarity to the English prisoners, for they would set
them up as a butt or mark to shoot at; several of whom were thus
murdered in cool blood, by way of diversion.

White was marked out for a sacrifice by one of these villains, who, for
I know not what reason, had sworn his death which he escaped thus. One
of the crew, who had a friendship for White, knew this fellow’s design
to kill him in the night, and therefore advised him to lie between him
and the ship’s side, with intention to save him; which indeed he did,
but was himself shot dead by the murderous villain, who mistook him for
White.

After some time cruising along the coast, the pirates doubled the Cape
of Good Hope, and shaped their course for Madagascar, where, being drunk
and mad, they knocked their ship on the head, at the south end of the
island, at a place called by the natives Elexa. The country thereabouts
was governed by a king, named Mafaly.

When the ship struck, Capt. White, Capt. Boreman, (born in the Isle of
Wight, formerly a lieutenant of a man of war, but in the merchant’s
service when he fell into the hands of the pirates) Capt. Bowen and some
other prisoners, got into the long-boat, and with broken oars and barrel
staves, which they found in the bottom of the boat, paddled to Augustin
Bay, which is about 14 or 15 leagues from the wreck, where they landed,
and were kindly received by the king of Bavaw (the name of that part of
the island) who spoke good English.

They stayed here a year and a half at the king’s expense, who gave them
a plentiful allowance of provision, as was his custom to all white men,
who met with any misfortune on his coast. His humanity not only provided
for such, but the first European vessel that came in, he always obliged
to take in the unfortunate people, let the vessel be what it would; for
he had no notion of any difference between pirates and merchants.

At the expiration of the above term, a pirate brigantine came in, on
board which the king obliged them to enter, or travel by land to some
other place, which they durst not do; and of two evils chose the least,
that of going on board the pirate vessel which was commanded by one
William Read, who received them very civilly.

This commander went along the coast, and picked up what Europeans he
could meet with. His crew, however, did not exceed forty men. He would
have been glad of taking on board some of the wrecked Frenchmen, but for
the barbarity they had used towards the English prisoners. However, it
was impracticable, for the French pretending to lord it over the
natives, whom they began to treat inhumanly, were set upon by them, one
half of their number cut off, and the other half made slaves.

Read, with this gang, and a brigantine of 60 tons, steered his course
for the gulf of Persia, where they met a grab (a one masted vessel) of
about 200 tons, which was made prize. They found nothing on board but
bale goods, most of which they threw overboard to search for gold, and
to make room in the vessel; but as they learned afterwards, they threw
over, in their search, what they so greedily hunted after, for there was
a considerable quantity of gold concealed in one of the bales they
tossed into the sea.

In this cruise Capt. Read fell ill and died, and was succeeded by one
James. The brigantine being small, crazy, and worm-eaten, they shaped
their course for the island of Mayotta, where they took out the masts of
the brigantine, fitted up the grab, and made a ship of her. Here they
took in a quantity of fresh provisions, which are in this island very
plentiful, and very cheap; and found a twelve oared boat, which formerly
belonged to the Ruby East-Indiamen, which had been lost there.

They stayed here all the monsoon time, which is about six months; after
which they resolved for Madagascar. As they came in with the land, they
spied a sail coming round from the East side of the island. They gave
chase on both sides, so that they soon met. They hailed each other, and
receiving the same answer from each vessel, viz. _from the seas_, they
joined company.

This vessel was a small French ship, laden with liquors from Martinico,
first commanded by one Fourgette, to trade with the pirates for slaves,
at Ambonawoula, on the East side of the island, in the lat. of 17
degrees 30 minutes and was by them taken after the following manner.

The pirates, who were headed by George Booth, now commander of the ship,
went on board (as they had often done) to the number of ten, and carried
money with them, under pretence of purchasing what they wanted. This
Booth had formerly been gunner of a pirate ship, called the Dolphin.
Capt. Fourgette was pretty much upon his guard, and searched every man
as he came over the side, and a pair of pocket pistols were found upon a
Dutchman, who was the first entered. The captain told him, _he was a
rogue, and had a design upon his ship_, and the pirates pretended to be
so angry with this fellow’s offering to come on board with arms, that
they threatened to knock him on the head, and tossingly him rough into
the boat, ordered him ashore, though they had before taken an oath on
the bible, either to carry the ship or die in the undertaking.

They were all searched, but they however contrived to get on board four
pistols, which were all the arms they had for the enterprise, though
Fourgette had 20 hands on board, and his small arms on the awning, to be
in readiness.

The captain invited them into the cabin to dinner, but Booth chose to
dine with the petty officer though one Johnson, Isaac, and another, went
down. Booth was to give the watch-word, which was _hurrah_. Standing
near the awning, and being a nimble fellow, at one spring threw himself
upon it, drew the arms to him, fired his pistol forward among the men,
one of whom he wounded, (who jumping overboard was lost) and gave the
signal.

Three, I said, were in the cabin, and seven upon deck, who with
handspikes and the arms seized, secured the ship’s crew. The captain and
his two mates, who were at dinner in the cabin, hearing the pistol, fell
upon Johnson, and stabbed him in several places with their forks, but
they being silver did him no great damage. Fourgette snatched his piece,
which he snapped at Isaac’s breast several times, but it would not go
off. At last, finding his resistance vain, he submitted, and the pirates
set him, and those of his men, who would not join them, on shore,
allowing him to take his books, papers, and whatever else he claimed as
belonging to him self; and besides treating him very humanely, gave him
several casks of liquor, with arms and powder to purchase provisions in
the country.

I hope this digression, as it was in a manner needful, will be excused.
I shall now proceed.

After they had taken in the Dolphin’s company, which were on the island,
and increased their crew, by that means, to the number of 80 hands, they
sailed to St. Mary’s, where Capt. Mosson’s ship lay at anchor, between
the island and the main. This gentleman and his whole ship’s company had
been cut off, at the instigation of Ort Van Tyle, a Dutchman of
New-York.

Out of her they took water casks and other necessaries; which having
done, they designed for the river Methelage. On the west side of
Madagascar, in the lat. of 16 degrees or thereabouts, to salt up
provisions and to proceed to the East-Indies, cruise off the islands of
St. John, and lie in wait for the Moor ships from Mocha.

In their way to Methelage they fell in (as I have said) with the pirate,
on board of which was Capt. White. They joined company, came to an
anchor together in the above named river, where they had cleaned,
salted, and taken in their provisions, and were ready to go to sea, when
a large ship appeared in sight, and stood into the same river.

The pirates knew not whether she was a merchantman or man of war. She
had been the latter, belonging to the French king, and could mount 50
guns; but being taken by the English, she was bought by some London
merchants, and fitted out from that port to slave at Madagascar, and go
to Jamaica. The captain was a young, inexperienced man, who was put in
with a nurse.

The pirates sent their boats to speak with them, but the ship firing at
them, they concluded it a man of war, and rowed ashore; the grab
standing in, and not keeping her wind so well as the French built ship,
run among a parcel of mangroves, and a stump piercing her bottom, she
sunk: the other run aground, let go her anchor, and came to no damage,
for the tide of flood fetched her off.

The captain of the Speaker, for that was the name of the ship which
frightened the pirates, was not a little vain of having forced these two
vessels ashore, though he did not know whether they were pirates or
merchantmen, and could not help expressing himself in these words: “How
will my name ring on the exchange, when it is known I have run two
pirates aground;” which gave handle to a satirical return from one of
his men after he was taken, who said, “Lord! how our captain’s name will
ring on the exchange; when it is heard, he frightened two pirate ships
ashore, and was taken by their two boats afterwards.”

When the Speaker came within shot, she fired several times at the two
vessels; and when she came to an anchor, several more into the country,
which alarmed the negroes, who, acquainting their king, he would allow
him no trade, till the pirates living ashore, and who had a design on
his ship, interceded for them, telling the king, they were their
countrymen, and what had happened was through a mistake, it being a
custom among them to fire their guns by way of respect, and it was owing
to the gunner of the ship’s negligence that they fired shot.

The captain of the Speaker sent his purser ashore, to go up the country
to the king, who lived about 24 miles from the coast, to carry a couple
of small arms inlaid with gold, a couple of brass blunderbusses, and a
pair of pistols, as presents, and to require trade. As soon as the
purser was ashore, he was taken prisoner, by one Tom Collins, a
Welchman, born in Pembroke, who lived on shore, and had belonged to the
Charming Mary, of Barbadoes, which went out with a commission but was
converted to a pirate. He told the purser he was his prisoner, and must
answer the damage done to merchants who were slaving. The purser
answered, that he was not commander; that the captain was a hot rash
youth, put into business by his friends, which he did not understand;
but however, satisfaction should be made. He was carried by Collins on
board Booth’s ship, where, at first, he was talked to in pretty strong
terms; but after a while very civilly used, and the next morning sent up
to the king with a guide, and peace made for him.

The king allowed them trade, and sent down the usual presents, a couple
of oxen between twenty and thirty people laden with rice, and as many
more with the country liquor, called _toke_.

The captain then settled the factory on the shore side, and began to buy
slaves and provisions. The pirates were among them, and had
opportunities of sounding the men, and knowing in what posture the ship
lay. They found by one Hugh Man, belonging to the Speaker, that there
were not above 40 men on board, and that they had lost the second mate
and 20 hands in the long-boat, on the coast, before they came into this
harbour, but that they kept a good look out, and had their guns ready
primed. However, he, for a hundred pounds, undertook to wet all the
priming, and assist in taking the ship.

After some days the captain of the Speaker came on shore, and was
received with a great deal of civility by the heads of the pirates,
having agreed before to make satisfaction. In a day or two after, he was
invited by them to eat a barbecued shoat, which invitation he accepted.
After dinner, Capt. Bowen, who was, I have already said, a prisoner on
board the French pirate, but now become one of the fraternity, and
master of the grab, went out, and returned with a case of pistols in his
hand, and told the captain of the Speaker, whose name I won’t mention,
that he was his prisoner. He asked, upon what account? Bowen answered,
“they wanted a ship, his was a good one, and they were resolved to have
her, to make amends for the damage he had done them.”

In the mean while his boat’s crew, and the rest of his men ashore, were
told by others of the pirates, who were drinking with them, that they
were also prisoners: some of them answered, _Zound’, we don’t trouble
our heads what we are, let’s have t’other bowl of punch_.

A watch word was given, and no boat to be admitted on board the ship.
This word, which was for that night, _Coventry_, was known to them. At 8
o’clock they manned the twelve-oared boat, and the one they found at
Mayotta, with 24 men, and set out for the ship. When they were put off,
the captain of the Speaker desired them to come back as he wanted to
speak with them. Capt. Booth asked what he wanted! He said, “they could
never take his ship.” “Then,” said Booth, “we’ll die in or along side of
her.”—“But,” replied the captain, “if you will go with safety, don’t
board on the larboard side for there is a gun out of the steerage loaded
with partridge, which will clear the decks.” They thanked him, and
proceeded.

When they were near the ship they were hailed, and the answer was, _the
Coventry_. “All well,” said the mate, “get the lights over the side;”
but spying the second boat, he asked what boat that was? One answered,
it was a raft of water; another that it was a boat of beef; this
disagreement in the answers made the mate suspicious, who cried
out—_Pirates, take to your arms my lads_, and immediately clapped a
match to a gun, which, as the priming was before wet by the treachery of
Hugh Man, only fizzed. They boarded in the instant, and made themselves
masters of her, without the loss of a man on either side.

The next day they put necessary provisions on board the French built
ship, and gave her to the captain of the Speaker, and those men who
would go off with him, among whom was Man, who had betrayed his ship;
for the pirates had both paid him the £100 agreed, and kept his secret.
The captain having thus lost his ship, sailed in that which the pirates
gave him, for Johanna, where he fell ill and died with grief.

The pirates having here victualled, they sailed for the Bay of St.
Augustine where they took in between 70 and 80 men, who had belonged to
the ship Alexander commanded by Capt. James, a pirate. They also took up
her guns, and mounted the Speaker with 54, which made up their number
240 men, besides slaves, of which they had about 20.

From hence they sailed for the East-Indies, but stopped at Zanguebar for
fresh provisions, where the Portuguese had once a settlement, but now
inhabited by Arabians. Some of them went ashore with the captain to buy
provisions. The captain was sent for by the governor, who went with
about 14 in company. They passed through the guard, and when they had
entered the governor’s house, they were all cut off; and, at the same
time, others who where in different houses of the town were set upon,
which made them fly to the shore. The long-boat, which lay off a
grappling, was immediately put in by those who looked after her. There
were not above half a dozen of the pirates who brought their arms
ashore, but they plied them so well, for they were in the boat, that
most of the men got into her. The quarter-master ran down sword in hand,
and though he was attacked by many, he behaved himself so well, that he
got into a little canoe, put off, and reached the long-boat.

In the interim, the little fort the Arabians had played upon the ship,
which returned the salute very warmly. Thus they got on board, with the
loss of Capt. Booth and 20 men, and set sail for the East-Indies. When
they were under sail, they went to voting for a new captain, and the
quarter-master, who had behaved so well in the last affair with the
Arabians, was chosen; but he declining all command, the crew made choice
of Bowen for captain Pickering to succeed him as master, Samuel Herault,
a Frenchman, for quarter-master, and Nathaniel North for captain
quarter-master.

Things being thus settled, they came to the mouth of the Red Sea, and
fell in with 13 sail of Moor ships, which they kept company with the
greater part of the day, but afraid to venture on them, as they took
them for Portuguese men of war At length part were for boarding, and
advised it. The captain though he said little, did not seem inclined,
far he was but a young pirate, though an old commander of a merchantman.
Those who pushed for boarding, then desired Capt. Boremen, already
mentioned, to take the command; but he said he would not be an usurper;
that nobody was more fit for it than he who had it; that for his part he
would stand by his fuzil, and went forward to the forecastle with such
as would have him take the command, to be ready to board; on which, the
captain’s quarter-master said, if they were resolved to engage, their
captain, (whose representative he was) did not want resolution;
therefore ordered them to get their tacks on board (for they had already
made a clear ship) and get ready for boarding; which they accordingly
did, and coming up with the sternmost ship, they fired a broadside into
her, which killed two Moors, clapped her on board and carried her; but
night coming on, they made only this prize, which yielded them £500 per
man. From hence they sailed to the coast of Malabar. The adventures of
these pirates on this coast are already set down in Captain Bowen’s
life, to which I refer the reader, and shall only observe, that Capt.
White was all this time before the mast, being a forced man from the
beginning.

Bowen’s crew dispersing, Capt. White went to Methelage, where he lived
ashore with the King not having an opportunity of getting off the
island, till another pirate ship, called the Prosperous, commanded by
one Howard, who had been bred a lighterman on the river Thames, came in.
This ship was taken at Augustin, by some pirates from shore, and the
crew of their own long-boat, which joined them, at the instigation of
one Ranten, boatswain’s mate, who sent for water. They came on board in
the night and surprised her, though not without resistance, in which the
captain and chief mate were killed, and several others wounded.

Those who were ashore with Capt. White, resolving to enter in this ship,
determined him to go also, rather than be left alone with the natives,
hoping, by some accident or other, to have an opportunity of returning
home. He continued on board this ship, in which he was made
quarter-master, till they met with, and all went on board of Bowen, as
is set down in his life, in which ship he continued after Bowen left
them. At Port Dolphin he went off in the boats to fetch some of the crew
left ashore, the ship being blown to sea the night before. The ship not
being able to get in, and he supposing her gone to the west side of the
island, as they had formerly proposed, he steered that course in his
boat with 26 men. They touched at Augustin, expecting the ship, but she
not appearing in a week, the time they waited, the king ordered them to
be gone, telling them they imposed on him with lies, for he did not
believe they had any ship: however he gave them fresh provision: they
took in water, and made for Methelage. Here as Capt. White was known to
the king, they were kindly received, and stayed about a fortnight in
expectation of the ship, but she not appearing, they raised their boat a
streak, salted the provision the king gave them, put water aboard, and
stood for the north end of the island, designing to go round, believing
their ship might be at the island of St. Mary. When they came to the
north end, the current, which sets to the N. W. for eight months in the
year, was so strong they found it impossible to get round. Wherefore
they got into a harbour, of which there are many for small vessels. Here
they stayed about three weeks or a month, when part of the crew were for
burning the boat, and travelling over land to a black king of their
acquaintance, who name was Reberimbo, who lived at a place called
Manangaromasigh, in lat. 15 deg. or thereabouts. As this king had been
several times assisted by the whites in his wars, he was a great friend
to them. Capt. White dissuaded them from this undertaking, and with much
ado, saved the boat; but one half of the men being resolved to go by
land, they took what provisions they thought necessary, and set out.
Capt. White, and those who stayed with him, convoyed them a day’s
journey, and then returning, he got into the boat with his companions,
and went back to Methelage, fearing these men might return, prevail with
the rest, and burn the boat.

Here he built a deck on his boat, and lay by three months, in which time
there came in three pirates with a boat, who had formerly been trepanned
on board the Severn and Scarborough men of war, which had been looking
for pirates on the east side; from which ships they made their escape at
Mohila, in a small canoe to Johanna, and from Johanna to Mayotta, where
the king built them the boat which brought them to Methelage. The time
of the current’s setting with violence to the N. W. being over, they
proceeded together in White’s boat (burning that of Mayotta) to the
north end, where the current running yet too strong to get round, they
went into a harbour and stayed there a month, maintaining themselves
with fish and wild hogs, of which there was a great plenty. At length,
having fine weather, and the strength of the current abating, they got
round; and after sailing about 40 miles on the east side, they went into
a harbour, where they found a piece of a jacket, which they knew
belonged to one of those men who had left them to go over land. He had
been a forced man, and a ship carpenter. This they supposed he had torn
to wrap round his feet: that part of the country being barren and rocky.
As they sailed along this coast, they came to an anchor in convenient
harbours every night, till they got as far as Manangaromasigh, where
king Reberimbo resided, where they went in to inquire for their men, who
left them at the north end, and to recruit with provisions. The latter
was given them, but they could get no information of their companions.

From hence they went to the island of St. Mary, where a canoe came off
to them with a letter directed to any white man. They knew it to be the
hand of one of their former ship-mates. The contents of this letter was
to advise them to be on their guard, and not trust too much to the
blacks of this place, they having been formerly treacherous. They
inquired after their ship, and were informed, that the company had given
her to the Moors, who were gone away with her, and that they themselves
were settled at Amboynavoula, about 20 leagues to the southward of St.
Mary, where they lived among the negroes as so many sovereign princes.

One of the blacks, who brought off the letter went on board their boat,
carried them to the place called Olumbah, a point of land made by a
river on one side, and the sea on the other, where twelve of them lived
together in a large house they had built, and fortified with about
twenty pieces of cannon.

The rest of them were settled in small companies of about 12 or 14
together, more or less, up the said river, and along the coast, every
nation by itself, as the English, French, Dutch &c. They made inquiry of
their consorts after the different prizes which belonged to them, and
they found all very justly laid by to be given them, if ever they
returned, as were what belonged to the men who went over land. Capt.
White, hankering after home, proposed going out again in the boat; for
he was averse to settling with them; and many others agreed to go under
his command; and if they could meet with a ship to carry them to Europe,
to follow their old vocation. But the others did not think it reasonable
he should have the boat, but that it should be set to sale for the
benefit of the company. Accordingly it was set up, and Capt. White
bought it for 400 pieces of eight, and with some of his old consorts,
whose number was increased by others of the ship’s crew, he went back
the way he had come to Methelage. Here he met with a French ship of
about 50 tons, and 6 guns, which had been taken by some pirates who
lived at Maratan, on the east side of the island, and some of the
Degrave East-Indiaman’s crew, to whom the master of her refused a
passage to Europe; for as he had himself been a pirate, and
quarter-master to Bowen, in the Speaker, he apprehended their taking
away his ship. War then subsisting between England and France, he
thought they might do it without being called in question as pirates.
The pirates who had been concerned in taking Herault’s ship, for that
was his name, had gone up the country, and left her to the men belonging
to the Degrave who had fitted her up, cleaned and tallowed her, and got
in some provision, with a design to go to the East-Indies, that they
might light on some ship to return to their own country.

Capt. White, finding these men proposed joining him, and going round to
Ambonavoula, to make up a company, it was agreed upon, and they
unanimously chose him commander. They accordingly put to sea, and stood
away round the south end of the island, and touched at Don Mascarenhas,
where he took in a surgeon, and stretching over again to Madagascar,
fell in with Ambonavoula, and made up his complement of 60 men. From
hence he shaped his course for the island of Mayotta, where he cleaned
his ship, and waited for the season to go into the Red Sea. His
provisions being taken in, the time proper, and the ship well fitted, he
steered for Babelmandel, and running into a harbour, waited for the
Mocha ships.

He here took two grabs laden with provisions, and having some small
money and drugs aboard. These he plundered of what was for his turn,
kept them a fortnight by him, and let them go. Soon after they spied a
lofty ship, upon which they put to sea; but finding her European built,
and too strong to attempt, for it was a Dutchman, they gave over the
chase, and were glad to shake him off, and return to their station.
Fancying they were here discovered, from the coast of Arabia, or that
the grabs had given information of them they stood over for the
Ethiopian shore, keeping a good look out for the Mocha ships. A few days
after, they met with a large ship of about 1000 tons and 600 men, called
the Malabar, which they chased, kept company with all night, and took in
the morning, with the loss of only their boatswain, and two or three men
wounded. In the taking this ship, they damaged their own so much, by
springing their foremast, carrying away their bowsprit, and beating in
part of their upper works, that they did not think her longer fit for
their use. They therefore filled her with prisoners, gave them provision
and sent them away.

Some days after this they spied a Portuguese man of war of 44 guns,
which they chased, but gave it over, by carrying away their
main-top-mast, so that they did not speak with her, for the Portuguese
took no notice of them. Four days after they had left this man of war,
they fell in with a Portuguese merchantman, which they chased with
English colours flying. The chase, taking White for an English man of
war or East-Indiaman, made no sail to get from him, but on his coming
up, brought to, and sent his boat on board with a present of sweet-meats
for the English captain. His boat’s crew was detained, and the pirates
getting into his boat with their arms, went on board, and fired on the
Portuguese, who being surprised, asked if war was broke out between
England and Portugal? They answered in the affirmative, but the captain
could not believe them. However they took what they liked, and kept him
with them.

After two days they met with the Dorothy, an English ship, Capt.
Penruddock, commander, coming from Mocha. They exchanged several shot in
the chase, but when they came along side of her, they entered their men,
and found no resistance, she being navigated by Moors, no Europeans,
except the officers being on board. On a vote, they gave Capt.
Penruddock (from whom they took a considerable quantity of money) the
Portuguese ship and cargo, with what bale he pleased to take out of his
own, bid him go about his business, and make what he could of her. As to
the English ship, they kept her for their own use.

Soon after, they plundered the Malabar ship, out of which they took as
much money as came to £200 sterling a man, but missed 50,000 sequins,
which were hid in a jar under a cow’s stall, kept for the giving milk to
the Moor supercargo, an ancient man. They then put the Portuguese and
Moor prisoners on board the Malabar, and sent them about their business.
The day after they had sent them away, one Capt. Benjamin Stacy, in a
ketch of 6 guns fell into their hands. They took what money he had, and
what goods and provisions they wanted. Among the money were 500 dollars,
a silver mug and two spoons belonging to a couple of children on board,
who were under the care of Stacy. The children took on for their loss,
and the captain asking the reason of their tears, was answered by Stacy,
that the above sum and plate was all the children had to bring them up.
Capt. White made a speech to his men, and told them it was cruel to rob
the innocent children; upon which, by unanimous consent, all was
restored them again. Besides, they made a gathering among themselves,
and made a present to Stacy’s mate, and other of his inferior officers,
and about 120 dollars to the children. They then discharged Stacy and
his crew, and made the best of their way out of the Red Sea.

They came into the bay of Defarr, where they found a ketch at anchor,
which the people had made prize of, by seizing the master and boat’s
crew ashore. They found a French gentleman, one Monsieur Berger, on
board, whom they carried with them, took out about 2000 dollars, and
sold the ketch to the chief ashore for provision.

Hence they sailed for Madagascar, but touched at Mascarenhas, where
several of them went ashore with their booty, about £1200 a man. Here
taking in fresh provisions, White steered for Madagascar, and fell in
with Hopeful Point where they shared their goods, and took up
settlements ashore, where White built a house, bought cattle, took off
the upper deck of his ship, and was fitting her up for the next season.
When she was near ready for sea, Capt. John Halsey, who had made a
broken voyage, came in with a brigantine, which being a more proper
vessel for their turn, they desisted from working on the ship, and those
who had a mind for fresh adventures, went on board Halsey among whom
Capt. White entered before the mast.

At his return to Madagascar, White was taken ill of a flux, which in
about five or six months ended his days. Finding his time was drawing
nigh, he made his will, left several legacies, and named three men of
different nations, guardian to a son he had by a woman of the country,
requiring he might be sent to England with the money he left him, by the
first English ship, to be brought up in the Christian religion, in hopes
he might live a better man than his father. He was buried with the same
ceremony they used at the funerals of their companions, which is
mentioned in the account of Halsey. Some years after, an English ship
touching there, the guardians faithfully discharged their trust, and put
him on board with the captain, who brought up the boy with care, acting
by him as became a man of probity and honour.


                            CAPTAIN CONDENT.

Captain Condent was a Plymouth man born, but we are as yet ignorant of
the motives and time of his first turning pirate. He was one of those
who thought fit to retire from Providence, on Governor Rogers’ arrival
at that island, in a sloop belonging to Mr. Simpson, of New-York, a Jew
merchant of which sloop he was then quarter-master. Soon after they left
the island, an accident happened on board, which put the whole crew into
consternation. They had among them an Indian man, whom some of them had
beat: in revenge, he got most of the arms forward into the hold, and
designed to blow up the sloop; upon which, some advised scuttling the
deck and throwing grenade shells down; but Condent said, that was too
tedious and dangerous, since the fellow might fire through the deck and
kill several of them. He, therefore, taking a pistol in one hand, and
his cutlass in the other, leaned into the hold. The Indian discharged a
piece at him, which broke his arm; but, however, he ran up and shot the
Indian. When he was dead, the crew hacked him to pieces, and the gunner,
ripping up his belly, tore out his heart, broiled and ate it.

After this, they took a merchantman called the Duke of York; and some
disputes arising among the pirates, the captain, and one half of the
company, went on board the prize; the other half, who continued in the
sloop, chose Condent captain. He shaped his course for the Cape-de-Verd
Islands, and in his way took a merchant ship from Madeira, laden with
wine, bound for the West-Indies, which he plundered and let go; then
coming to the Isle of May, one of the said islands, he took the whole
salt fleet, consisting of about 20 sail. Wanting a boom, he took out the
mainmast of one of these ships to supply the want. Here he took upon
himself the administration of justice, inquiring into the manner of the
commanders behaviour to their men, and those against whom complaint was
made he whipped and pickled. He took what provision and other
necessaries he wanted, and having augmented his company by volunteers
and forced men, he left the ships and sailed to St. Jago, where he took
a Dutch ship, which had formerly been a privateer. This proved also an
easy prize, for he fired but one broadside, and clapping her on board,
carried her without resistance, for the captain and several men were
killed, and some wounded by his great shot.

The ship proving for his purpose, he gave her the name of the Flying
Dragon, went on board with his crew, and made a present of his sloop to
a mate of an English prize, whom he had forced with him. From hence he
stood away for the coast of Brazil, and in his cruise took several
Portuguese ships, which he plundered and let go.

After these, he fell in with the Wright galley, Capt. John Spelt,
commander, hired by the South Sea company, to go to the coast of Angola
for slaves, and thence to Buenos Ayres. This ship he detained a
considerable time, and the captain being his townsman, treated him very
civilly. A few days after he took Spelt, he made prize of a Portuguese,
laden with bale goods and stores. He new rigged the Wright galley, and
put on board of her some of the goods. Soon after he had discharged the
Portuguese, he met with a Dutch Fast Indiaman of 28 guns, whose captain
was killed the first broadside, and took her with little resistance, for
he had hoisted the pirate’s colours on board Spelt’s ship.

He now, with three sail, steered for the island of Ferdinando, where he
hove down and cleaned the Flying Dragon. Having careened, he put 11
Dutchmen on board Capt. Spelt, to make amends for the hands he had
forced from him, and sent him away, making him a present of the goods he
took from the Portuguese ship. When he sailed himself, he ordered the
Dutch to stay at Ferdinando 24 hours after his departure; threatening,
if he did not comply, to sink his ship, if he fell a second time into
his hands, and to put all the company to the sword. He then stood for
the coast of Brazil, where he met a Portuguese man of war of 70 guns,
which he came up with. The Portuguese hailed him, and he answered, _from
London, bound to Buenos Ayres_. The Portuguese manned his shrouds and
cheered him, when Condent fired a broadside and a volley of small arms,
which began a smart engagement for the space of three glasses; but
Condent finding himself over-matched, made the best of his way, and
being the best sailer, got off.

A few days after, he took a vessel of the same nation, who gave an
account, that he had killed above 40 men in the guarda del Costa, beside
a number wounded. He kept along the coast to the southward, and took a
French ship of 18 guns, laden with wine and brandy, bound for the South
Sea, which he carried with him into the River of Plate. He sent some of
his men ashore to kill some wild cattle, but they were taken by the crew
of a Spanish man of war. On their examination before the captain, they
said they were two Guinea ships, with slaves belonging to the South Sea
company, and on this story were allowed to return to their boats. Here
five of his forced men ran away, with his canoe; he plundered the French
ship, cut her adrift, and she was stranded. He proceeded along the
Brazil coast, and hearing a pirate ship was lost upon it, and the
pirates imprisoned, he used all the Portuguese who fell into his hands,
who were many, very barbarously, cutting off their ears and noses; and
as his master was a papist, when they took a priest, they made him say
mass at the mainmast, and would afterwards get on his back and ride him
about the decks, or else load and drive him like a beast. He from this
went to the Guinea coast, and took Capt. Hill, in the Indian Queen.

In Luengo Bay he saw two ships at anchor, one a Dutchman of 44 guns, the
other an English ship, called the Fame, Capt. Bowen, commander. They
both cut and ran ashore; the Fame was lost, but the Dutch ship the
pirate got off and took with him. When he was at sea again, he
discharged Captain Hill, and stood away for the East-Indies. Near the
Cape he took an Ostend East-Indiaman, of which Mr. Nash a noted merchant
in London, was supercargo. Soon after he took a Dutch East-Indiaman,
discharged the Ostender, and made for Madagascar. At the Isle of St.
Mary, he met with some of Capt. Halsey’s crew, whom he took on board
with other stragglers, and shaped his course for the East-Indies, and in
the way, at the island of Johanna, took, in company with two other
pirates he met at St. Mary’s, the Cassandra East-Indiaman, commanded by
Capt. James Macraigh. He continued his course for the East-Indies, where
he made a very great booty; and returning, touched at the isle of
Mascarenhas, where he met with a Portuguese ship of 70 guns, with the
viceroy of Goa on board. This ship he made prize of, and hearing she had
money on board, they would allow of no ransom, but carried her to the
coast of Zanguebar, where was a Dutch fortification, which they took and
plundered, razed the fort, and carried off several men voluntarily. From
hence they stood for St. Mary’s, where they shared their booty, broke up
their company, and settled among the natives. Here a snow came from
Bristol, which they obliged to carry a petition to the governor of
Mascarenhas for a pardon, though they paid the master very generously.
The governor returned answer he would take them into protection if they
would destroy their ships, which they agreed to, and accordingly sunk
the Flying Dragon &c. Condent and some others went to Mascarenhas, where
Condent married the governor’s sister-in-law, and remained some time;
but, as I have been credibly informed, he is since come to France,
settled at St. Maloes, and drives a considerable trade as a merchant.


                            CAPTAIN BELLAMY.

As we cannot, with any certainty, deduce this man from his origin, we
shall begin where we find him first a declared enemy to mankind. Capt.
Bellamy and Paul Williams, in two sloops, had been upon a Spanish wreck,
and not finding their expectation answered, they resolved not to lose
their labour, and agreed to _go upon the account_, a term among the
pirates, which speaks their profession. The first who had the misfortune
to fall in their way, was Capt. Prince, bound from Jamaica to London, in
a galley built at that port, whose cargo consisted of elephant’s teeth,
gold dust, and other rich merchandise. This prize not only enriched but
strengthened them. They immediately mounted this galley with 28 guns,
and put on board 150 hands, of different nations; Bellamy was declared
captain, and the vessel had her old name continued, which was Whidaw.
This happened about the latter end of February, 1717. They, now thus
fitted for continuing their desperate resolution, shaped their course
for Virginia, which coast they very much infested, taking several
vessels. They were upon shifting this station, when they were very near,
as the psalmist expresses it, _going quick down into hell_; for the
heavens beginning to lower, prognosticated a storm. At the first
appearance of the sky being likely to be overcast, Bellamy took in all
his small sails, and Williams doubled-reefed his mainsail, which was
hardly done when a thunder shower overtook them with such violence, that
the Whidaw was very near oversetting. They immediately put before the
wind, for they had no other way of working, having only the goose wings
of the fore-sail to scud with. Happy for them the wind was at W. by N.
for had it been easterly, they must have infallibly perished upon the
coast. The storm increased towards night, and not only put them by all
sail, but obliged the Whidaw to bring her yards aportland, and all they
could do with tackles to the goose neck of the tiller, four men in the
gun-room, and two at the wheel, was to keep her head to the sea, for had
she once broached to, they must infallibly have foundered. The heavens,
in the mean while, were covered with sheets of lightning, which the sea,
by the agitation of the saline particles, seemed to imitate. The
darkness of the night was such, as the scripture says, _as might be
felt_; the terrible hollow roaring of the winds, could be only equalled
by the repeated, I may say, incessant claps of thunder, sufficient to
strike a dread of the Supreme Being, who commands the sea and the winds,
one would imagine in every heart; but among these wretches, the effect
was different, for they endeavoured by their blasphemies, oaths, and
horrid imprecations, to drown the uproar of jarring elements. Bellamy
swore he was sorry he could not run out his guns to return the salute,
meaning the thunder, that he fancied the gods had got drunk over their
tipple, and were gone together by the ears. They continued scudding all
that night under their bare poles: the next morning the mainmast being
sprung in the step, they were forced to cut it away, and at the same
time, the mizen came by the board. These misfortunes made the ship ring
with blasphemy, which was increased, when, by trying the pumps, they
found the ship made a great deal of water; though by continually plying
them, they kept it from gaining. The sloop, as well as the ship, was
left to the mercy of the winds, though the former, not having a tant
mast, did not lose it. The wind shifting round the compass, made so
outrageous and short a sea, that they had little hopes of safety; it
broke upon the poop, drove in the taffarel, and washed the two men away
from the wheel, who were saved in the netting. The wind after four days
and three nights, abated its fury, and fixed in the N. N. E. point,
hourly decreasing, and the weather clearing up they spoke to the sloop,
and resolved for the coast of Carolina. They continued this course but a
day and a night, when the wind coming about to the southward, they
changed their resolution to that of going to Rhode Island. All this
while the Whidaw’s leak continued, and it was as much as the lee pump
could do to keep the water from gaining, though it was kept continually
going. Jury-masts were set up, and the carpenter finding the leak to be
in the bows, occasioned by the oakum working out of a seam, the crew
became very jovial again. The sloop received no other damage than the
loss of the mainsail, which the first flurry tore away from the boom. In
their cruise off Rhode-Island, the beginning of April, they took a sloop
commanded by Capt. Beer, belonging to Boston, in the lat. of
South-Carolina, 40 leagues from land. They put the said captain on board
the Whidaw, while they rifled and plundered his vessel, which Williams
and Bellamy proposed returning to him, but the crews being averse to it,
they sunk her, and put the captain ashore upon Block Island.

I cannot pass by in silence, Capt. Bellamy’s speech to Capt. Beer. _I am
sorry they won’t let you have your sloop again, for I scorn to do any
one a mischief when it is not for my advantage; —— the sloop, we must
sink her, and she might be of use to you. Though you are a sneaking
puppy, and so are all those who will submit to be governed by laws which
rich men have made for their own security, for the cowardly whelps have
not the courage otherwise to defend what they get by their knavery; but
—— ye altogether: —— them for a pack of crafty rascals, and you, who
serve them, for a parcel of hen-hearted numskulls. They vilify us, the
scoundrels do, when there is only this difference, they rob the poor
under the cover of law, forsooth, and we plunder the rich under the
protection of our own courage. Had you not better make one of us, than
sneak after these villains for employment?_ Captain Beer told him, that
his conscience would not allow him to break through the laws of God and
man. _You are a devilish conscience rascal_, replied Bellamy; _I am a
free prince, and I have as much authority to make war on the whole
world, as he who has a hundred sail of ships at sea, and an army of
100,000 men in the field; and this my conscience tells me: but there is
no arguing with such snivelling puppies, who allow superiors to kick
them about deck at pleasure_.

The pirates, wanting neither provisions nor water, and the Whidaw’s
damage being repaired, passed the time very jovially.

A fortnight after setting Capt. Beer ashore, Williams boarded and took a
vessel off Cape Cod, laden with wine; the crew of which increased the
number of their prisoners. They put seven men on board the prize, with
orders to keep company with the ship and sloop, and left on board her
the master.

As they had been long off the careen, they stood away to the northward,
and made the best of their way to Penobscot river. When they were at the
mouth of it, it was thought more eligible to careen in the river
Mechisses. They entered it as agreed and run up about two miles and a
half, where they came to an anchor with their prizes. The next morning
all the prisoners were set ashore with drivers, and orders to assist in
building huts; the guns were also set ashore, and a breast work raised,
with embrasures for the cannon on each side of the river. This took up
four days. A magazine was dug deep in the earth, and a roof raised over
it by the poor slaves, the prisoners, whom they treated after the same
manner as the negroes are used by the West-India planters. The powder
being secured, and every thing out, they hove down the sloop, cleaned
her, and when she had all in again, they careened the Whidaw by the
largest prize.

They now thought of cruising again, and accordingly steered for
Fortune’s Bay in Newfoundland. They made some prizes on the Banks,
forced all the men, and sunk the vessels.

They had not been long on this coast before they were separated by a
storm, which held some days. Off the island of St. Paul the Whidaw spied
a sail, which she immediately gave chase to. The ship brought to and lay
by for her, and proved a Frenchman of 36 guns, carrying soldiers to
Quebec. The Whidaw engaged with great resolution, and the French did not
show less, for he boarded the Whidaw and was twice put off, with the
loss of men on both sides. Bellamy, after two hour’s engagement, thought
the Frenchman too hard a match, and was for shaking him off; but his
enemy was not as willing to part with him, for he gave chase, and as he
sailed altogether as well as Bellamy, the latter had certainly been
taken, and had received the due punishment of his crimes, had not the
night coming on favoured his escape. He lost in this engagement 36
hands, besides several wounded.

The Whidaw returned to the coast of Newfoundland, and off Placentia Bay
met with his consort and the prize. They resolved to visit again the
coast of New-England, the Whidaw being much shattered in the late
engagement, having received a great many shot in her hull. They ran down
this coast, and between St. George’s Banks and Nantucket Shools, took
the Mary Anne.

The master of the vessel, taken formerly off Cape Cod, was left on board
her, and as he was very well acquainted with the coast, they ordered him
to carry the light and go ahead; and the pirates commonly kept him at
the helm. He upon a night of public rejoicing, seeing all the pirates
drunk, laid hold of the opportunity, and run his vessel ashore about
midnight, near the land of Eastham, out of which he alone escaped with
life. The Whidaw, steering after the light, met with the same fate. The
small vessel ran into a sandy bay, and the men got ashore without
difficulty.

When the Whidaw struck, the pirates murdered all their prisoners, that
is, all their forced men; as it is concluded, from the mangled carcasses
which were washed ashore; but not a soul escaped out of her or Williams,
who was also lost.

The pirates, to the number of seven, who escaped, were seized by the
inhabitants, and on the information of the master who escaped, and on
their own confession were imprisoned, condemned, and executed. They were
all foreigners, very ignorant and obstinate; but by the indefatigable
pains of a pious and learned divine, who constantly attended them; they
were at length, by the special grace of God, made sensible of, and truly
penitent, for the enormous crimes they had been guilty of.


                          CAPTAIN WILLIAM FLY.

As to the birth of this pirate, we can discover nothing by the inquiries
we have hitherto made; and indeed had we succeeded in our search, it
would have been of no great consequence; for it is certain by the
behaviour of the man, he must have have been of very obscure parents;
and by his education, (as he was no artist) very unfit in all respects,
except that of cruelty, for the villaneous business he was in. We have
been informed, that he had been in a pirate in a private capacity, and
having escaped justice, had an opportunity of repenting his former
crimes, and as a foremast man, or petty officer, of getting his bread in
a warrantable way. But no—ignorant as he was of letters, he was
ambitious of power, and capable of the most barbarous actions to acquire
it.

Capt. Green, of Bristol, in April, 1726, shipped this Fly as boatswain,
at Jamaica, being bound, in the Elizabeth snow, of Bristol, for the
coast of Guinea. Fly, who had insinuated himself with some of the men,
whom he found ripe for any villany, resolved to seize the said snow, and
murder the captain and mate, and taking the command on himself, turn
pirate. He proposed this design to his brothers in iniquity, who
approving it, he, having the watch at one o’clock in the morning, on the
27th day of May, went up to one Morrice Cundon, then at the helm,
accompanied by Alexander Mitchel, Henry Hill, Samuel Cole, Thomas
Winthrop, and other conspirators, and swore if he spoke one word, or
stirred either hand or foot, he would blow his brains out; and tucking
up his shirt above the elbows with a cutlass in his hand, he, with
Mitchel, went into the captain’s cabin, and told him he must turn out.
The captain, asking what was the matter, was answered by Mitchel, they
had no time to answer impertinent questions; that if he would turn out
and go upon deck quietly, it would save them the trouble of scraping the
cabin; if he would not, a few buckets of water and a scraper would take
his blood out of the deck: that they had chosen Capt. Fly for commander,
and would allow of no other, and would not waste their provisions to
feed useless men.

The Captain replied, that since they had so resolved, he should make no
resistance; but begged they would not murder him, since his living could
be no obstacle to their designs; that he had never been harsh to either
of them, and therefore they could not kill him out of revenge; and if it
was only for their security, he desired, if they would not take his word
to do nothing to obstruct the measures they had resolved on, they would
secure him in irons, till he might be put somewhere on shore, _Ah_, says
Fly, _to live and hang us, if we are ever taken: no, no, walk up, that
bite won’t take; it has hanged many an honest fellow already_. Mitchel
and Fly then laying hold of him, pulled him out of his bed. The poor
captain entreating them to spare his life for his soul’s sake, told them
he would bind himself down by the most solemn oaths, never to appear
against them; that he was unfit to appear before the judgment seat of a
just and pure God; that he was loaded with sins, and to take him off
before he had washed those stains, which sullied his soul, by the tears
of repentance, would be a cruelty beyond comparison greater than that of
depriving him of life, were he prepared for death, since it would be,
without any offence committed against them, dooming him to eternal
misery. However, if they would not be persuaded that his life was
consistent with their safety, he begged they would allow some time to
prepare himself for the great change: that he begged no other mercy than
what the justice and compassion of the laws would allow them, should
they hereafter be taken. —— _your blood_, said Mitchel, _no preaching.
Be —— a’ you will, what’s that to us? Let him look out who has the
watch. Upon deck you dog, for we shall lose no more time about you._

They hauled him into the steerage, and forced him upon deck, where one
of the hell-hounds asked if he had rather take a leap like a brave
fellow, or be tossed over like a sneaking rascal? The captain addressing
himself to Fly, said, _Boatswain, for God’s sake don’t throw me
overboard; if you do I am for ever lost; Hell’s the portion of my
crimes. —— him_, answered Fly, _since he’s so Godly, we’ll give him time
to say his prayers, and I’ll be parson. Say after me._ Lord have mercy
on me. _Short prayers are best, so no more words and over with him, my
lads._ The captain still cried for mercy, and begged an hour’s respite
only, but all in vain; he was seized by the villains and thrown
overboard. He caught, however, and hung by the main sheet, which
Winthrop seeing, fetched the cooper’s broad axe, and chopping off the
unhappy master’s hand, he was swallowed up by the sea.

The captain being thus dispatched, Thomas Jenkins, the mate, was secured
and brought upon deck, to share the same cruel fate. His entreaties were
as useless as the captain’s; the sentence they had passed upon him was
not to be reversed; they were deaf to his prayers and remonstrances,
strangers to humanity and compassion. He was of the captain’s mess, they
said, and they should e’en drink together; it was a pity to part good
company.

Thus they jested with his agonies. He, however, made some struggle,
which irritating his murderers, one of them snatched up the axe, with
which Winthrop had lopped off the captain’s hand, and gave him a great
cut on the shoulder, by missing his head, where the blow was aimed, and
he was thrown into the sea. He swam notwithstanding, and called out to
the doctor to throw him a rope, who, poor man, could not hear him, being
secured, and laid in irons in his own cabin; and had he heard, and been
able to have thrown the rope required, could it be expected that these
hardened wretches would have relented, and shown him mercy? But the
sinking man will catch at a straw, and hope, they say, is the last that
deserts us. While we have life we are apt to flatter ourselves some
lucky accident may favour us.

It was next debated what should be done with the doctor. Some were for
sending him to look after the captain and mate; but the majority, as he
was a useful man, thought it better to keep him. All obstacles being
removed, Mitchel saluted Fly captain, and with the rest of the crew who
had been in the conspiracy, with some ceremony, gave him possession of
the great cabin.

Here a bowl of punch being made, Morrice Cundon was called down, and one
John Fitzherbert, set to the helm in his place. At the same time the
carpenter and Thomas Streaton were brought before the captain, who told
them they were three rascals, and richly deserved to be sent after the
captain and mate, but that they were willing to show them mercy, and not
put them to death in cold blood and he would therefore only put them in
irons, for the security of the ship’s crew. They were accordingly
ordered out, and ironed. Fly then told his comrades it was convenient to
resolve on some course, when word was brought them, that a ship was very
near them. The council broke up, and made a clear ship, when in a very
little while after, they found it was the Pompey, which had left Jamaica
in company with the snow. The Pompey, standing for the snow which did
not make from her, soon hailed and asked how Capt. Green did, and was
answered by Fly, that he was very well. They did not think fit to attack
this ship, but returned to hold their consultation; it was resolved to
steer for North-Carolina.

Upon their arrival on that coast they spied a sloop at anchor within the
bar. She was called the John and Hannah, and commanded by Capt. Fulker
who thinking the snow might want a pilot, stepped into his boat with his
mate, Mr. Atkinson, and Mr. Roan, two passengers, and a young lad, in
order to bring her in. When they came on board, they were told, that the
snow was from Jamaica, with a cargo. Capt. Fulker and Mr. Roan were
desired to walk down to the captain, who was in the cabin. Fly received
them very civilly, ordered a bowl of punch, and hearing Capt. Fulker had
brought another passenger on board Mr. Atkinson was also invited down.

The punch being brought in, Capt. Fly told his guest, _that he was no
man to mince matters; that he and his comrades were gentlemen of
fortune, and should make bold to try if Capt. Fulker’s sloop was a
better sailer than the snow. If she was, she would prove much fitter for
their business, and they must have her._ The snow came to an anchor
about a league off the sloop, and Fly ordered Fulker, with six of his
own hands, into the boat to bring her along side of the snow; but the
wind proving contrary, their endeavours proved also vain, and they
returned again in the boat, bringing Capt. Fulker back with them. As
soon as they got on board the snow, Fly fell into a violent passion,
cursing and abusing Fulker for not bringing off the sloop. He gave him
his reason, and said it was impossible. _You lie you dog_, replied the
pirate, _but your hide shall pay for your roguery, and if I can’t bring
her off, I’ll burn her where she lies._ He then ordered Capt. Fulker to
the geers; no reason, no arguments could prevail; he was stripped and
lashed after a very inhuman manner; and the boat’s crew being sent
again, with much ado carried her off as far as the bar, where she bilged
and sunk. The pirates then endeavoured to set what remained of her out
of water on fire, but they could not burn her.

The snow getting under sail to look-out for some booty, Fulker and the
others desired they might be set at liberty, but it was denied them for
the present, though not without a promise that they should be released
the first vessel they took. On the 5th of June they left Carolina, and
the next day spied a sail, which proved the John and Betty, commanded by
Capt. Gale, bound from Barbadoes to Guinea. Fly gave chase, but finding
the ship wronged him, he made a signal of distress, hoisting his jack at
the main-top-mast head; but this decoy did not hinder the ship making
the best of her way. Fly continued the chase all night, and the wind
slackening, he came within shot of the ship, and fired several guns at
her under his black ensign. The ship being of no force, and the pirates
ready to board, the captain struck; and Fly, manning his long-boat, the
crew being well armed with pistols and cutlasses, went on board the
prize, and sent Capt. Gale, after having secured his men, prisoner on
board the snow. This prize was of little value to the pirates, who took
nothing but some sail-cloth and small arms, and after two days let her
go, but took away six of his men, setting on board Capt. Fulker, a
passenger, and Capt. Green’s surgeon. They kept Mr. Atkinson, knowing he
was a good artist, and lately master of the Boneta brigantine, as a
pilot for the coast of New-England, which they were satisfied he was
well acquainted with.

Upon Mr. Atkinson’s desiring to have his liberty with the others, Capt.
Fly refused it with the most horrid oaths and imprecations, and insisted
upon it that he should act as their pilot; assuring him at the same
time, if he piloted them wrong, his life should be the forfeit.

Mr. Atkinson answered, it was very hard he should be forced to take upon
himself the pilotage, when he did not pretend to know the coast, and
that his life should answer for any mistake his ignorance of it might
make him guilty of, and therefore begged he might be set on board Capt.
Gale; and that they would trust their own knowledge, since he did not
doubt there being better artist on board. _No no_, replied Fly, _that
won’t do—your palavering won’t save your bacon; so either discharge your
trust like an honest man, (for go you shan’t) or I’ll send you with my
service to the d—l: so no more words about the matter._

There was no reply made, and they stood for the coast of New-England.
Off Delaware Bay they made a sloop, commanded by one Harris, bound from
New-York to Pennsylvania. She had on board about fifty passengers. Fly
gave chase, and coming up with her, hoisted his black ensign, and
ordered her to strike, which she immediately did; and Fly sent Capt.
Atkinson on board, to sail her, though he would not allow him (Atkinson)
any arms. The pirates ransacked this prize, but not finding her of any
use to them, after a detention of 24 hours, they let her go, with her
men, excepting only a well made young fellow, whose name was James
Benbrooke, whom they kept.

Fly, after having released the prize, ordered Capt. Atkinson to carry
the snow into Martha’s Vineyard, but he wilfully missed this place. Fly,
finding himself beyond Nantucket, and that his design was balked, called
to Atkinson, and told him _he was a rascally scoundrel and that it was a
piece of cruelty to let such a villain live, who designed the death of
so many honest fellows_. Atkinson, in his defence, said, he never
pretended to know the coast, and that it was very hard he should die for
being thought an abler man than he really was. Had he pretended to be
their pilot, and did not know his business, he deserved punishment; but
when he was forced upon a business which he before declared he did not
understand, it would be certainly cruel to make him suffer for their
mistake. _You are an obstinate villain_, replied Fly, _and your design
is to hang us; but blood and wounds, you dog, you shan’t live to see
it_—and saying this, he ran into his cabin and brought a pistol, with
design to shoot Atkinson; but by the interposition of Mitchel, who
thought him innocent of any design, he escaped.

Atkinson, who perceived his life every minute in danger, began to
ingratiate himself with the pirates and gave them hopes, that with good
and gentle usage, he might be brought to join them. This he did not say
in express terms, but by words he now and then let drop, as by accident.
They were not a little rejoiced at the idea of having so good an artist
to join them; nay some of them hinted to him, that if he would take upon
him the command, they were ready to dispossess Capt. Fly, who carried
his command too high, and was known to all the crew to be no artist, and
to understand nothing beyond the business of a boatswain. Atkinson
thought it his interest to keep them in the opinion that he would join;
but always declined hearing any thing as to the command.

This made him less severely used, and protected him from the insults of
Fly, who imagined he would betray them the first opportunity, therefore,
more than once proposed his being thrown overboard, which was never
approved by the snow’s company.

From Nantucket they stood to the eastward, and off Brown’s Bank made a
fishing schooner. Fly, coming up with her, fired a gun, and hoisting his
black ensign, swore, _if they did not instantly bring to, and send their
boat on board, he would sink her_. The schooner obeyed, and sent away
her boat on board the snow. He examined the captain as to what vessels
were to be met with, and promised, if he could put him in the way of
meeting with a good sailer, to let him go, and give him his vessel, or
he should otherwise keep her. The poor man told him he had a companion
which would soon be in sight, and was a much better vessel. Accordingly
about 12 at noon, the same day, which was the 23d of June, the other
schooner hove in sight; upon which Fly manned this prize with six
pirates and a prisoner named George Tasker, and sent her in chase,
having himself on board the snow, no more than three pirates, Capt.
Atkinson, (who had worked himself into some favour with him) and fifteen
forced men; but he took care to have his arms upon deck by him.

The men who had not taken on with Fly, were Atkinson, Capt. Fulker’s
mate, and two youths belonging to him; the carpenter and gunner
belonging to Capt. Green; six of Capt. Gale’s men, and the aforesaid
Benbrooke, who belonged to Capt. Harris, with three of the men out of
the schooner. Atkinson, seeing the prisoners and forced men were five to
one of the pirates, thought of delivering himself from the bondage he
was in: and as by good luck several other fishing vessels hove in sight,
right ahead of the snow, he called to Capt. Fly, and told him he spied
several other vessels ahead, desiring he would come forward and bring
his glass. Fly did so, and leaving his arms on the quarter deck, set on
the windlass to see if he could make out what they were. Atkinson, who
had concerted his measures with one Walker and the above mentioned
Benbrooke, secured the arms on the quarter deck, and gave them a signal
to seize Fly; which they did, with very little trouble, and afterwards
made themselves masters of the other three pirates and the snow, the
rest of the prisoners, not knowing any thing of, or what the design
might be, remaining altogether inactive, and brought the snow and
pirates to Great Brewster, where a guard was put on board, June 28,
1726.

Soon after, the said pirates were brought to their trial, that is, on
the 4th of July following, before the Honourable William Dummer, Esq.,
Lieutenant Governor and commander in chief of the province of
Massachusetts Bay, President of the Special Court of Admiralty, at the
court-house of Boston, assisted by 18 gentlemen of the council; before
whom they were found guilty of murder and piracy condemned to be
executed, and accordingly were executed the 12th of July. Fly was
ordered to be hanged in chains at the entrance of the harbour of Boston.
Thus ended the short reign of an obdurate wretch, who only wanted skill
and power to be as infamous as any who scoured the seas. The names of
the three pirates, executed with him, were, Samuel Cole, George Condick,
and Henry Greenvil.


                         CAPTAIN THOMAS HOWARD.

We have said, in another life, viz. White’s that he was a lighterman on
the river Thames. His father was of that business, and had the character
of a very honest man. After his father’s decease, he grew very
extravagant, and squandered away not only what he had left his son, but
what he had allotted for his widow, whose indulgence, putting every
thing into her son’s hands, was followed by being herself turned out of
doors, for he sold the house over her head. After having ruined himself
and mother, his friends fearing the wickedness of his inclination would
bring scandal upon them, persuaded him to go to sea, and procured him a
voyage to Jamaica, on board a merchant ship. At this island he ran away
from his ship, and associating himself with some desperate fellows, they
stole a canoe, and went away to the Grand Camanas, to join some others
of their own stamp, who lurked thereabouts, with design _to go on the
account_, the term for pirating. They met those they looked for, made up
a company of 20 men, surprised and made themselves masters of a turtling
sloop, and set out in search of booty.

The first prizes they made were only turtlers, which, however, increased
the number of their crew, some being willing to join them, others being
forced, with threats of being set on shore, on some desolate key. After
some time cruising, they met with an Irish brigantine, which had
provisions and servants on board. They made an exchange with the master,
gave him provision to carry him to Jamaica, and allowed five hands to go
with him. The rest (except the servants, who readily took on with the
pirates) were all forced. Not long after, they surprised a sloop which
had been trading on the Spanish coast. As she had 6 guns, and was a fit
vessel for their turn, they changed her against the brigantine. Several
hands belonging to this sloop entered volunteers, and several more were
obliged to join them by compulsion. After this capture, they steered for
the coast of Virginia, and in their way, met with a large New-England
brigantine, laden with provisions bound for Barbadoes. This they made
prize of, and shifting their own guns on board her, sent the master away
with the sloop, after forcing some of his men with them. They had now a
vessel of ten guns, and a crew of 80 men, of whom one James was captain,
and Howard quarter-master.

While they lay on the coast of Virginia, they made prize of several
ships from England, out of which they took men, liquors, provisions,
clothes and whatever else they liked or thought necessary. As these
ships had several felons on board, who were transports, they had out of
them a number of volunteers, besides forced men; so that they had a
large complement. Among other Virginia ships which fell into their
hands, they made prize, with little trouble, of a fine galley, mounted
with 24 guns, which afforded them a great many volunteers, as she had a
number of transported malefactors and servants on board. They changed
their brigantine for this ship, and soon after, the man of war, which
waited on this coast, heaving in sight, they thought proper to take
their departure.

From the coast of Virginia, they shaped their course for that of Guinea,
where they took a great many ships of different nations, all which they
rifled of what they thought fit. Out of these ships they forced on board
a number of men, equal to the number of those formerly compelled, who
desired, and whom they permitted, to be discharged, after much entreaty.

After they had been some months on the coast, they spied a large three
decked Portuguese ship, from Brazil, mounted with 36 guns. They gave
chase and came up with her. The captain would make no resistance; but
his mate, who was an Englishman, named Rutland, thinking it a shame to
give up such a ship, resolved to defend her; which the Portuguese
captain consented to, but went himself out of harm’s way. Rutland, who
had been master of an English brigantine, taken from him on the same
coast by another gang of pirates, fought them the better part of a
forenoon; but the Portuguese flying the decks, and only 30 men, who were
English, Dutch, and French, standing by him, he was obliged to ask
quarters, which were given. When the pirates came on board, they asked
Rutland if he was commander? He answered, no. They inquired after him,
and being told he was somewhere in the hold, they searched, and found
him hid in the powder room; whence they hauled him up, and whipped him
round the deck for his cowardice. Rutland, and those who fought the
ship, were forced on board, and their complement being now 180 men, they
exchanged their galley for the Portuguese ship, carried her in shore,
and ripping off her upper deck, made her deep waisted, by cutting down
some of her gunnel. This prize they named the Alexander.

They went down the coast in this ship, and made several prizes, some of
which they discharged, and put on board such of their forced men as
begged their discharge; others they sunk, and burnt others; but forced
on board carpenters, caulkers, armourers, surgeons, and musicians. In
their way to Cape Lopez, where they designed, and afterwards did clean,
they found a large Bristol ship at an anchor, which had lost a great
many men by sickness, and had then but few healthy on board, who got
into the boat, and endeavoured to get on shore, but were prevented by
the pirates. Here they changed some more of their forced men, and did
intend to change their ship; but on a survey, found the Bristol ship too
old for their purpose, and therefore left her at an anchor, after they
had taken what they thought of use to them. This ship belonged to one
Mr. Godly, of Bristol.

They met with nothing else in their way to Cape Lopez, where they
cleaned their ship, took in wood and water, and then stood away to sea
again. At their leaving Cape Lopez, they spied an English ship, which
they came up with and engaged. The merchantman made an obstinate
defence, and finding the design to board, made to close quarters.
Howard, and seven or eight more, entered; but the pirate’s boatswain not
having secured his lashing, they fell astern, and left these men on
board the merchant ship, who seeing themselves in danger, hauled up the
boat, which the chase had astern, and cutting the rope, got on board the
Alexander, which being considerably the larger ship, and drawing a great
deal more water, struck on an unknown bank, which the merchantman went
over, and by this lucky accident escaped.

This obliged the pirates to start their water, and throw over the wood
to get the ship off, which put them under a necessity of going back to
Cape Lopez to take in those necessaries. After having a second time
wooded and watered, they put again to sea, fell in with and took two
Portuguese brigantines, which they burnt, and setting the men on shore,
they made for, and doubled the Cape of Good Hope, and shaped their
course for Madagascar, where to the northward of, and near a small
island, they run the ship on a reef, where she stuck fast. The captain
being then sick in his bed, the men went ashore on the small adjacent
island, and carried off a great deal of provisions and water to lighten
the ship, on board of which none but the captain, the quarter-master,
and about eleven more were left.

The quarter-master, who was Howard, with the others, took all the
treasure, put it on board the boats, and made off for the main of
Madagascar. The captain, hearing nobody stir upon deck, made shift to
crawl out of his cabin, and seeing them put off, fired the two fore
chase guns at them, which alarmed (to no purpose) the men ashore. As the
sea ebbed, the ship lay dry, and they could walk to her from the island.
She might have been saved had they the boats to carry out an anchor; but
for want of them they brought every thing ashore, at tide of flood, upon
rafts. As the ship lay in a quiet place, they had opportunity to rip her
up, and build a vessel out of her wreck. The major part of the crew
being English and Dutch who sided together, they forced about 36
Portuguese and French (thinking their crew too numerous for their
provisions in the present circumstances) to get upon a raft, and take
their chance with the sea-breeze to get to the island of Madagascar,
about three leagues from them. They finished a vessel of 60 tons, but
the day they designed to have launched her, a pirate brigantine hove in
sight, who took them on board.

Howard and his consorts stood along the W. side of the island, with
design to round the N. end, and to go to St. Mary’s but finding the
current too strong to stem, they lay there about a fortnight. In the
interim they spied three sail of tall ships, which were men of war under
Commodore Littleton, viz. the Anglesa, Hastings, and Lizard, who had
carried a pardon to the island of St. Mary’s, accepted of by many of the
pirates. Thinking these might be also pirates, they made a smoke, which
brought the boats ashore; but finding they were men of war’s boats, the
pirates thought fit to abscond; wherefore, finding nothing nor any body,
the said men of war’s boats returned, and the ships kept their cruise.

They had here plenty of fish and wild hogs which they found in the
woods. One day, when Howard was hunting, his comrades took the
opportunity, went off, rounded the north end, and left Mr. Howard to
provide for himself.

About four or five-and-twenty leagues from the Cape, they went into a
fine harbour on the east side, not frequented, nay, hardly known to the
European ships. They were here received handsomely, treated and provided
with fresh meat, and what necessaries they wanted, by the king of this
district, whose name was Mushmango, who had formerly been driven from
Augustin by war, and travelling through the heart of the country, had
here fixed his settlement. When the boats were victualled, and while
Johnson, who took on him the command after they had deserted Howard, was
ashore with three more, the rest went off with the boats and booty, and
stood away to the southward, along the coast, designing for St. Mary’s,
going every night into some harbour, or coming to an anchor under some
point when the winds proved contrary.

Johnson addressed himself to the king, and told him the boat and goods
were his property; upon which he went along shore with a number of men,
and found the boat at an anchor, and all asleep, except one to look out,
at whom the king fired his blunderbuss, and killed him. The report of
the piece awakened the others, who cut and stood off the coast. The king
returned, gave Johnson an account of his expedition, and furnished him a
canoe, some calabashes of fresh water, provisions, and lances, that he
might pursue after his people. Johnson kept the shore on board till he
came to the island of St. Mary’s, where he heard his comrade fugitives
were gone to, and settled at Ambonavoula, in a village belonging to the
natives on the river of Manansallang. Leaving his canoe, he went into
one belonging to an inhabitant, who carried him to his companions.

After he had been here some few months, Fourgette, already mentioned in
White’s life, came in with his ship from Martinico. With this vessel
they sailed to the west side, and came to an anchor at an island called
Anquawla, 30 leagues from the place where they left Howard.

Some of the subjects of the king of Anquawla had before met with, and
brought hither, Capt. Howard, who seeing the ship at anchor near shore,
hailed her, and desired the boat might be sent to fetch him off, which
was accordingly done, and he joined the rest of the crew. Here two boys
ran away from them, whom they demanded of the king; but he not
delivering them, they went ashore by day-break, surprised his town, and
brought off twelve of his concubines, whom they detained on board, till
their boys, who were blacks, were returned, and then delivered them
back. From this ship he went on board the Speaker, where he continued
till she was lost on Mauritius, when he came back to Madagascar, and
settled at Augustin. Here he tarried till the Prosperous, a ship of 36
guns, commanded by Capt. Hilliard, came in, which Howard and some other
pirates (with the assistance of the boatswain and some of the crew
belonging to the ship,) seized. In taking this ship, the captain and his
chief mate were killed, and several others wounded. Howard was by the
company declared captain. Several of the ships crew took on with them,
and they went round the south end to the east side, till they came the
length of Maritan, where they found some of the Speaker’s company, whom
they took on board, and made up their complement about 70 men.

From hence they steered for the island of St. Mary’s, where they heeled
their ship, watered, wooded, and shipped some more hands. Here they had
an invitation from one Ort Van Tyle, who lived on the main of
Madagascar, to come to the ceremony of christening two of his children.
They were kindly received and treated by him, but it having been
reported that this Ort Van Tyle had murdered some pirates, they in
revenge, though they had no certainty of the fact, took him prisoner,
plundered his house, and what goods they could not take off in a great
canoe belonging to him, they threw into the river or burnt. Ort Van Tyle
they designed to carry on board, and hang at the yard-arm; but one of
the pirates helped him to escape, and he took into the woods, where
meeting some of his blacks, he waylaid his canoe and Howard’s pinnace by
the river side. Besides what goods they had on board of this Dutchman’s
they had several women and children belonging to him and some white men,
who had left them under his care. The pirates set the women to the
paddles, and the canoe was overset on the bar; Ort Van Tyle fired on the
men, and shot one through the arm and through the thigh, whom with his
comrade, he took prisoner, and kept with him. The rest of the men got
ashore on the south side of the river and escaped him; the women on the
north side, and returned home. When the pinnace came down, he fired and
shot the captain through the arm, but he got on board, where his arm was
set. After this, the Prosperous sailed for Methelage, where they
victualled, with a design to go to the East-Indies. While they lay here,
came in a large Dutch ship, well manned, and of 40 guns. The Prosperous
was not strong enough to attack her, and the Dutch, fearing he should
spoil his trade, would not meddle with Howard, though hard words passed,
and the Dutchman threatened to fall foul on him if he did not leave the
place, which Howard thought fit to do, and sailed to Mayotta.

A few days after the departure of the Prosperous, Capt. Bowen, in the
Scotch ship, came in, anchored within small arm shot, and right ahead of
the Dutchman, whom he saluted with 11 guns, shot and all, which the
other returned with 15, after the same manner; drums beating and
trumpets sounding on both sides. The Dutchman, however, was surprised,
and under apprehensions. He hailed the pirate, and answer was returned,
_From the seas_. He then bid them send their boat on board, which
accordingly went with the quarter-master, who told the captain, that
they had no design on him, but were going against the Moors, and came in
for provision. He replied, they could get none there, and the best way
was to be gone; however, the quarter-master went ashore, (where the
Dutch had made his factory, and had some goods) and shot down three
oxen, which he ordered the natives to help to cut in pieces. The
Dutchman, perceiving a friendship between the natives and pirates,
seeing Bowen full of men, and hearing two more pirates were expected,
thought fit to go off in the night, and leave the goods he had put on
shore.

A few days after, Bowen, seizing the goods left, went for Mayotta, where
he joined the Prosperous, and lay for the season to go to the
East-Indies. After some stay here, their salt provision perishing, they
returned to Madagascar to revictual, Bowen to St. Augustin, and Howard
(on board of whose ship was Capt. Whaley, taken as related in Bowen’s
life) to Methelage, agreeing to meet at the island of St. Johns, to lie
for the Moors fleet; where after some disappointments, they met, and got
sight of the Moors fleet, one of which fell a prize to Bowen; but the
Prosperous being a heavy sailer, did not come up with them till they
were at an anchor at the bar of Surat, where they waited to lighten. The
Moors seeing few hands on board, for Howard concealed his men, and not
imagining a pirate would venture up, concluded him an English
East-Indiaman. Howard clapped the largest on board, which stood him a
smart engagement, and killed him about 30 men. At length the pirates
forced Capt. Whaley who spoke the Moors language to go on board and
offer quarter, which they excepted. There was on board this prize a
nobleman belonging to the Great Mogul, who had been at Jaffa to buy
horses for his master. The prize yielded them a great booty, though they
found but part of the money which was on board. They intended to carry
her to Madagascar, but her bowsprit being wounded in the boarding, she
lost all her masts; wherefore they sent her adrift, and she ran ashore
at Deman, belonging to the Portuguese.

From hence he steered to the Malabar coast, where he met Bowen and his
prize, which mounted 56 guns. Both crews went on board Bowen, sunk the
Prosperous, and burnt the Scotch ship, called the Speedy Return. Hence
they stood along the coast of India; and Howard, with about 20 more,
landed with what they had, and retired among the natives, where Howard
married a women of the country, and being a morose, ill-natured fellow
and using her ill, he was murdered by her relations.


                             CAPTAIN LEWIS.

This worthy gentleman was an early pirate. We first find him a boy on
board the pirate Banister who was hanged at the yard arm of a man of war
in sight of Port Royal, Jamaica. This Lewis and another boy were taken
with him, and brought into the island hanging by the middle at the mizen
peak. He had a great aptitude for languages, and spoke perfectly well
that of the Mosquil Indians, French, Spanish, and English. I mention our
own, because it is doubted whether he was French or English, for we
cannot trace him back to his origin. He sailed out of Jamaica till he
was a lusty lad, and was then taken by the Spaniards at the Havana,
where he tarried some time; but at length he and six more ran away with
a small canoe, and surprised a Spanish periagua, out of which two men
joined them, so that they were now nine in company. With this periagua
they surprised a turtling sloop, and forced some of the hands to take on
with them; the others they sent away in the periagua.

He played at this small game, surprising and taking coasters and
turtlers, till with forced men and volunteers he made up a company of 40
men. With these he took a large pink built ship, bound from Jamaica to
the bay of Campeachy, and after her, several others bound to the same
place; and having intelligence that there lay in the bay a fine Bermuda
built brigantine of 10 guns, commanded by Capt. Tucker, he sent the
captain of the pink to him with a letter, the purport of which was, that
he wanted such a brigantine, and if he would part with her, he would pay
him 10,000 pieces of eight; if he refused this, he would take care to
lie in his way, for he was resolved, either by fair or foul means to
have the vessel. Capt. Tucker, having read the letter, sent for the
masters of vessels then lying in the bay, and told them, after he had
shown the letter, that if they would make him up 54 men, (for there were
about 10 Bermuda sloops) he would go out and fight the pirates. They
said no, they would not hazard their men, they depended on their
sailing, and every one must take care of himself as well as he could.

However, they all put to sea together, and spied a sail under the land,
which had a breeze while they lay becalmed. Some said he was a turtler;
others, the pirate, and so it proved; for it was honest Capt. Lewis, who
putting out his oars, got in among them. Some of the sloops had four
guns, some two, some none. Joseph Dill had two, which he brought on one
side, and fired smartly at the pirate, but unfortunately one of them
split, and killed three men. Tucker called to all the sloops to send him
men, and he would fight Lewis, but to no purpose; nobody came on board
him. In the mean while a breeze sprung up, and Tucker, trimming his
sails, left them, who all fell a prey to the pirate; into whom, however,
he fired a broadside at going off. One sloop, whose master I will not
name, was a very good sailer, and was going off; but Lewis firing a
shot, brought her to, and he lay by till all the sloops were visited and
secured. Then Lewis sent on board him, and ordered the master into his
sloop. As soon as he was on board, he asked the reason of his lying by,
and betraying the trust his owners had reposed in him, which was doing
like a knave and coward, and he would punish him accordingly; _for_,
said he, _you might have got off, being so much a better sailer than my
vessel_. After this speech, he fell upon him with a rope’s end, and then
snatching up his cane, drove him about the decks without mercy. The
master, thinking to pacify him, told him he had been out trading in that
sloop several months, and had on board a good quantity of money, which
was hid, and which, if he would send on board a black belonging to the
owners, he would discover to him. This had not the desired effect, but
one quite contrary; for Lewis told him he was a rascal and villain for
this discovery, and he would pay him for betraying his owners, and
redoubled his strokes. However, he sent and took the money and negro,
who was an able sailor. He took out of his prizes what he had occasion
for, 40 able negro sailors, and a white carpenter. The largest sloop,
which was about 90 tons, he took for his own use, and mounted her with
12 guns. His crew was now about 80 men, whites and blacks.

[Illustration: The Pirates Flogging the Captain of a Sloop. Page 155.]

After these captures, he cruised in the Gulf of Florida, laying in wait
for the West-India homeward bound ships that took the leeward passage,
several of which, falling into his hands, were plundered by him, and
released. From hence he went to the coast of Carolina, where he cleaned
his sloop, and a great many men whom he had forced, ran away from him.
However, the natives traded with him for rum and sugar, and brought him
all he wanted, without the government’s having any knowledge of him, for
he had got into a very private creek; though he was very much on his
guard, that he might not be surprised from the shore.

From Carolina he cruised on the coast of Virginia, where he took and
plundered several merchantmen, and forced several men, and then returned
to the coast of Carolina, where he did abundance of mischief. As he had
now an abundance of French on board, who had entered with him, and
Lewis, hearing the English had a design to maroon them, he secured the
men he suspected, and put them in a boat, with all the other English,
ten leagues from shore, with only ten pieces of beef, and sent them
away, keeping none but French and negroes. These men, it is supposed all
perished in the sea.

From the coast of Carolina he shaped his course for the banks of
Newfoundland, where he overhauled several fishing vessels, and then went
into Trinity Harbour in Conception Bay, where there lay several
merchantmen, and seized a 24 gun galley, called the Herman. The
commander, Capt. Beal, told Lewis, if he would send his quarter-master
ashore he would furnish him with necessaries. He being sent ashore, a
council was held among the masters, the consequence of which was, the
seizing the quarter-master, whom they carried to Capt. Woodes Rogers. He
chained him to a sheet anchor which was ashore, and planted guns at the
point, to prevent the pirate getting out, but to little purpose; for the
people at one of these points firing too soon, Lewis quitted the ship,
and, by the help of oars and the favour of the night, got out in his
sloop, though she received many shot in her hull. The last shot that was
fired at the pirate did him considerable damage.

He lay off and on the harbour, swearing he would have his
quarter-master, and intercepted two fishing shallops, on board of one of
which was the captain of the galley’s brother. He detained them, and
sent word, if his quarter-master did not immediately come off, he would
put all his prisoners to death. He was sent on board without hesitation.
Lewis and the crew inquired how he had been used, and he answered, very
civilly. “It’s well,” said the pirate, “for had you been ill treated, I
would have put all these rascals to the sword.” They were dismissed, and
the captain’s brother going over the side, the quarter-master stopped
him, saying, he must drink the gentlemen’s health ashore, particularly
Capt. Rogers’, and, whispering him in the ear, told him, if the crew had
known of his being chained all night, he would have been cut in pieces,
with all his men. After this poor man and his shallop’s company were
gone, the quarter-master told the usage he had met with, which enraged
Lewis, and made him reproach his quarter-master, whose answer was, that
he did not think it just the innocent should suffer for the guilty.

The masters of the merchantmen sent to Capt. Tudor Trevor, who lay at
St. John’s in the Sheerness man of war. He immediately got under sail,
and missed the pirate but four hours. She kept along the coast and made
several prizes, French and English, and put into a harbour where a
French ship lay making fish. She was built at the latter end of the war,
for a privateer, was an excellent sailer, and mounted 24 guns. The
commander hailed him: the pirate answered, _from Jamaica with rum and
sugar_. The Frenchman bid him go about his business; that a pirate sloop
was on the coast, and he might be the rogue: if he did not immediately
sheer off, he would fire a broadside into him. He went off and lay a
fortnight out at sea, so far as not to be descried from shore, with
resolution to have the ship. The Frenchman being on his guard, in the
mean while raised a battery on the shore, which commanded the harbour.
After a fortnight, when he was thought to be gone off, he returned, and
took two of the fishing shallops belonging to the Frenchman, and manning
them with pirates, they went in. One shallop attacked the battery, the
other surprised, boarded, and carried the ship, just as the morning star
appeared, for which reason he gave her that name. In the engagement the
owner’s son was killed, who made the voyage out of curiosity only. The
ship being taken, seven guns were fired, which was the signal, and the
sloop came down and lay along side the ship. The captain told him he
supposed he only wanted his liquor; but Lewis made answer, he wanted his
ship, and accordingly hoisted all his ammunition and provision into her.
When the Frenchman saw they would have his ship, he told her trim, and
Lewis gave him the sloop; and excepting what he took for provision, all
the fish he had made. Several of the French took on with him, who, with
others, English and French, had by force or voluntarily, made him up 200
men.

From Newfoundland he steered for the coast of Guinea, where he took a
great many ships, English, Dutch, and Portuguese. Among these ships was
one belonging to Carolina, commanded by Capt. Smith. While he was in
chase of this vessel an accident happened, which made his men believe he
dealt with the devil; for he carried away his fore and main-top-mast;
he, Lewis, running up the shrouds to the main-top, tore off a handful of
hair, and throwing it into the air, used this expression, _good devil,
take this till I come_. And it was observed, that he came afterwards
faster up with the chase than before the loss of his top-masts.

Smith being taken, Lewis used him very civilly, and gave him as much, or
more in value than he took from him, and let him go, saying, he would
come to Carolina when he had made money on the coast, and would rely on
his friendship.

They kept some time on the coast, when they quarrelled among themselves,
the French and English, of which the former was more numerous, and they
resolved to part. The French therefore chose a large sloop newly taken,
thinking the ship’s bottom, which was not sheathed, damaged by the
worms. According to this agreement they took on board what ammunition
and provision they thought fit out of the ship, and put off, choosing
one Le Barre captain. As it blew hard, and the decks were encumbered,
they came to an anchor under the coast, to stow away their ammunition,
goods, &c. Lewis told his men they were a parcel of rogues, and he would
make them refund; accordingly run along side, his guns being all loaded
and new primed, and ordered him to cut away his mast, or he would sink
him. Le Barre was obliged to obey. Then he ordered them all ashore. They
begged the liberty of carrying their arms, goods, &c. with them, but he
allowed them only their small arms and cartridge-boxes. Then he brought
the sloop along side, put every thing on board the ship, and sunk the
sloop.

Le Barre and the rest begged to be taken on board. However, though he
denied them, he suffered Le Barre and some few to come, with whom he and
his men drank plentifully. The negroes on board Lewis told him the
French had a plot against him. He answered, he could not withstand his
destiny; for the devil told him in the great cabin, he should be
murdered that night.

In the dead of the night, the rest of the French came on board in
canoes, got into the cabin and killed Lewis. They fell on the crew; but,
after an hour and a half’s dispute, the French were beat off, and the
quarter-master, John Cornelius, an Irishman, succeeded Lewis.


                        CAPTAIN JOHN CORNELIUS.

Having now the command of the Morning Star, Cornelius kept on the coast,
and made several prizes, both English and Portuguese. The former he
always discharged, after he had taken what he thought fit, but the
latter he commonly burnt.

While he was thus ravaging the coast, two English ships, which had
slaved at Whidaw, one of 56 guns, and the other 12, which fought close,
were ready to sail; and having notice of a pirate, who had done great
mischief, resolved to keep company together for their defence. The
captain of the small ship lay sick in his cabin, and she was left to the
care of the mates. When they had got under sail, 200 negroes jumped
overboard from the larger ship, which obliged her to bring to and get
out her boats. The mate of the other went into the cabin, told the
accident, and advised lying by, and sending their boats to assist their
consort; but the captain being ill, and willing to get off the coast,
bid him keep on his way, for it would be dangerous; having 400 slaves on
board; and being but weakly manned, when the boats were gone they might
rise upon him. The mate urged the danger of the pirates, should they
leave their consort. The captain answered, the seas were wide, and he
would not bring to; accordingly they kept on their way with a fresh
gale.

Two days after, the mate, about 8 in the morning, ordered a man to the
mast-head, who spied a sail, which made them prepare for an engagement.
There was on board one Robert Williams, who had served the African
company three years on the Guinea coast, who spoke the negro tongue very
well. He told the slaves he had picked out, to the number of 50, that
the ship in sight he believed would fight them, and if they got the
better, would certainly, as they were cannibals, kill and eat them all;
and therefore it behoved them to fight for their lives. They had lances
and small arms given them.

About 10, Cornelius came up with them, and being hailed, answered he was
a man of war, in search of pirates, and bid them send their boat on
board; but they refusing to trust him, though he had English colours and
pendant flying, the pirate fired a broadside, and they began a running
fight of about 10 hours, in-which time the negroes discharged their arms
so smartly, that Cornelius never durst attempt to board. About 8 at
night the ship blew up abaft. They immediately cut the lashings of the
long-boat, but the ship going down, they had not time to get her out,
and barely enough to launch the yawl, which lay on the forecastle. The
ship went down on one side, and Robert Williams running on the other,
was hooked by the mizen-truss, and was carried down with her; but having
his knife in his hand, and a great presence of mind, he cut the
waistband of his trowsers, where he was caught, got clear, and swam
after the boat, into which about 16 had gotten, and either knocked those
on the head, or cut off their hands, who laid hold on it; however, with
much entreaty, he was permitted to lay one hand on to ease him. They
made to the pirate, who refused to receive them, without they would
enter with him: which, to save their lives, they all agreed to, and were
then civilly received, and dry clothes given them. These and one negro
were all the souls saved.

In a little time after this he took two Portuguese ships, which he
plundered and kept with him; and one foggy morning, hearing the firing
of guns, which by the distance of time, he judged to be minute guns, as
they really were, for the death of an English commander, he called his
men on board from the prizes, sent them about their business, and
directed his course by the report of the cannon he had heard. In about
two hours he spied the ship that had fired, came up with her very soon,
and took her without resistance. The officers of the ship which blew up,
finding this prize English, and that the pirate did not intend to detain
her begged to be discharged, as they had all large families, which must
perish without their support. Cornelius, taking them into
considerations, discharged Mr. Powis of Limehouse, who has since been a
commander, and raised a fortune. The then chief mate, Mr. George
Forelong, the boatswain, carpenter, and other married men, he set on
board the prize, and was very generous to them out of the plunder of the
Portuguese ships, because they had made a broken voyage; but Robert
Williams and the other bachelors he detained, and forced some out of the
prize, which he let go.

After this he took three Portuguese ships at an anchor, which he
plundered and burnt, after he had hove down by one of them. He continued
some time longer on the coast, did a great deal of mischief to the
trade, and forced a great many men. These he put to do all the slavery
of the ship, and they were beat about the decks, without daring to
resent it. I shall take notice of an instance of this kind, to show how
far revenge will carry a man. One Robert Bland was at the helm, and
called Robert Williams to take whipstaff, till he went to play. Williams
refused it; upon which Bland drubbed him with the lanyard of the
whipstaff very severely. Williams, that he might revenge himself, and
have liberty to fight Bland, went that instant and entered himself a
volunteer in the ship’s books, and asked leave to fight Bland, which was
allowed him, but with no other weapons than his fists. He, however,
challenged his antagonist, who was too hard for him; so he turned pirate
to be heartily thrashed.

Cornelius, thinking they had been long enough on the Guinea coast,
doubled the Cape, off which he spied the Lizard, and two more men of
war, under the command of Commodore Littleton. Cornelius was for giving
chase, but finding his men unwilling there being, as they gave for
reason, 70 forced men on board, and these ships being, as they
suspected, men of war, he made the best of his way for Madagascar, went
up the river Methelage, or the west side, and anchored against
Pombotoque, a small village of blacks.

The quarter-master went ashore, and the black governor examined him, for
several of these blacks speak English. He told the governor they were
come for provision and to trade; upon which he sent a couple of oxen on
board, and then ordered some of the inhabitants to go up with the
quarter-master to the king. The boat’s crew seeing a number of blacks
come down to the strand without the quarter-master, apprehended some
mischief had befallen him; but were eased of their fears, when they saw
two oxen given them, and were told the white man, who was gone to the
king, would be back next day, it not being above 20 miles from the
shore.

When the quarter-master, who carried up a blunderbuss, a fine gun, and a
pair of pistols, for a present to the king, told him they wanted
provisions, he asked where they were bound? To which he answered, to
seek their fortunes, for at present they were very poor. _Look ye_,
replied the king, _I require nothing of you; all white men I look upon
as my children; they helped me to conquer this country, and all the
cattle in it are at their service. I will send down provisions enough,
and when that is spent, you shall have more._ He accordingly sent 1000
head of cattle, out of which he bid them choose what they would, and
they salted 100 fat oxen.

Besides the present of oxen, the king sent 100 blacks laden with rice.
Cornelius sent him a present of two barrels of powder, and would have
given him more, with small arms in return, but he sent them word he
would have no more, nor any of their arms, not being in want of either.
On the contrary, if they wanted, he would send them ten barrels of
powder, as they were his children; bade them proceed on their voyage,
and if they were richer when they came back, and would send him any
present, he would accept it, but not now, they were so poor.

Here Cornelius lost 70 men by their excesses. Having been long without
fresh provisions, the eating immoderately, and drinking _toke_ (a liquor
made of honey) to excess, threw them into violent fevers, which carried
them off.

The blacks having given Cornelius an account of the Speaker’s having
sailed from Methelage about three months before for the East-Indies, he,
having taken in his provisions, steered the same course, in hopes to
join in consort with her; but the Speaker lying off the Red Sea, and the
Morning Star going into the Gulf of Persia, they never met. They run up
a pretty way in the gulf, and lay under Antelope Island, where they kept
a look out, and whence they made their excursions, and took a number of
prizes.

Here they designed to heave down and clean, and they had got a good part
of their goods and water casks ashore, when the look-out discovered two
lofty ships, one of them wearing a flag at the fore-top-mast-head. This
put them into great confusion: they got what casks and necessaries they
could on board, and lay till the ships came abreast of them Then they
got under sail at once, their sails being furled with rope yarns, and
came close alongside the larger ship, which was a Portuguese of 70 guns,
as the other was of 26. They exchanged a broadside with her, and the
smaller ship engaged so close, that they threw hand grenades into each
other; but Cornelius’ business was to run, and the great ship put in
stays twice to follow him, but missing, was obliged to ware, which gave
the pirate a great advantage. The small ship, in staying, tailed
aground: she, however, gave chase till she had run a good way ahead of
her consort, which the pirate seeing, brought to, and stayed for her, as
did the Portuguese for her consort, not caring to engage him singly.
When it was quite dark, Cornelius ran up the other shore, passed the
Portuguese ships (which kept down the gulf) and came again to anchor at
his old station, where he found his enemies had been ashore in their
boats and staved his casks. He here cleaned, and finding no money to be
got out of any prizes made, and bale goods being of little value to
them, they from hence went away to the island of Johanna, where it was
designed to maroon the blacks, who were the greater number and all bred
among the English. Robert Williams, fearing they would next maroon the
English, who were not above a third of the whites, gave the negroes
notice of the design, who secured all the arms of the ship, and gave
Williams the command till they should get to Madagascar, keeping a good
guard on the French and Dutch. When they came to Methelage they gave the
ship to the king, her bottom being eaten so much with the worms that she
was no longer fit for service; and they all went and lived with the
king. About five months after they broke up, Cornelius died, and was
buried with the usual ceremony.


                        CAPTAIN DAVID WILLIAMS.

This man was born in Wales, of very poor parents, who bred him up to the
plough and the following of sheep, the only things he had any notion of
till he went to sea. He was never esteemed among the pirates as a man of
good natural parts, perhaps on account of his ignorance of letters; for
as he had no education, he knew as little of the sailing a ship, set
aside the business of a foremast man, as he did of history, in which,
and natural philosophy, he was equally versed. He was of a morose, sour,
unsociable temper, very choleric, and easily resented as an affront,
what a brave and a more knowing man would not think worth notice; but he
was not cruel, neither did he turn pirate from a wicked or avaricious
inclination, but by necessity; and we may say, though he was no forced
man, he could not well avoid the life he fell into.

When he was grown a lusty lad he would see the world, and go seek his
fortune, as the term is among the country youths, who think fit to
withdraw themselves from the subjection of their parents. With this whim
in his head, he got to Chester, where he was received, and sailed on
board a coaster, till he had made himself acquainted with the rigging,
learned to knot, splice, and do the other parts of a common sailor’s
duty; then coming to London, he shipped himself on board the Mary
Indiaman, bound for Bengal and Madras, which voyage he performed
outward, and it was not his fault that he did not come home in the same
ship; for, in her return, falling short of water, they steered for the
island of Madagascar, and fell in with the east side, in lat. 20 deg. or
thereabouts. The captain manned and sent ashore the long-boat to seek
for water, but a large surf running, she came to an anchor, at some
little distance from shore, and David Williams, with another, being good
swimmers, stripped and swam off in search of water. While they were
ashore, the wind, which blew full upon the island, and freshening,
caused the surf to run too high for them to get off; and the long-boat,
after waiting some time, seeing no possibility of getting these men on
board, weighed and stood for the ship, which filled her sails and stood
for St. Augustin’s Bay, where she watered, and proceeded on her voyage.

Thus our poor Welchman and his companion were left destitute on an
island altogether unknown to them, without clothes or subsistence but
what the fruits of the trees offered. They rambled some little time
along the coast, and were met by the natives, and by them carried up
into the country, where they were humanely treated, and provided with
all the necessaries of life, though this was not sufficient to expel his
consort’s melancholy, who took his being left behind so much to heart,
that he sickened and died in a very little time.

Some time after, the prince of the country, who entertained Williams,
had a quarrel with a neighbouring king, which broke into a war. Williams
took the field with his patron, but the enemy being superior in number,
got the victory, and took a great many prisoners, among whom was the
unfortunate Welchman. The king whose prisoner he was, treated him very
kindly; and being master of an old musket, gave it him, saying _such
arms were better in the hands of a white man than those of any of his
subjects, who were not so much used to them; that he should be his
friend and companion, and should fare as well as himself if he would
assist him in his wars_.

It will not be amiss here to take notice, that this island, on the east
side is divided into a great number of principalities or kingdoms, which
are almost in continual war one with another; the grounds of which are
very trivial, for they will pick a quarrel with a neighbour, especially
if he has a number of cattle, (in which, and slaves, consist their
riches) on the slightest occasion, that they may have an opportunity of
plunder; and when a battle or two is lost, the conquered makes his
peace, by delivering up such a certain number of bullocks and slaves as
shall be demanded by the victorious prince. On the west side the island,
the principalities are mostly reduced under one prince, who resides near
Methelage, and who is, as we have said in the lives of other pirates, a
great friend to white men; for his father, who founded his empire by the
assistance of the Europeans, left it in charge with his son, to assist
them with what necessaries they should require, and do them all friendly
offices; but if he disobeyed this command, and should ever fall out with
the white men, or spill any of their blood, he threatened to come again,
turn him out of his kingdom, and give it to his younger brother. These
menaces had a very great effect on him, for he firmly believed his
father would, on his disobedience, put them in execution; for there is
not on earth, a race of men equally superstitious.

But to return to Williams, he lived with this prince in great
tranquility, and was very much esteemed by him, (for necessity taught
him complaisance.) After some time, his new patron was informed that his
vanquished enemy had formed a grand alliance, in order to make war upon
him; wherefore, he resolved to begin, and march into the countries of
the allies, and ravage the nearest before they could join forces. He
raised an army, and accordingly marched southward. At the news of his
approach, the inhabitants abandoned all the small towns, and sending
messengers to their friends, raised a considerable body to oppose him,
suffering him to over-run a great deal of ground without molestation. At
length being reinforced, they took their opportunity, and setting upon
him when his men were fatigued, and his army encumbered with booty, they
gained a signal victory. The king had the good luck to get off, but
Williams was a second time taken prisoner.

He was carried before the conqueror, who, (having been an eye witness of
his bravery, for Williams killed a number of his enemies with his shot,
and behaved very well, defending himself with the butt end of his musket
for some time, when he was surrounded) reached him his hand, and told
him, he made war with his enemies only, that he did not esteem the white
men much, but should be glad of their friendship. Here Williams was used
with more respect than he had been even by his last patron, and lived
with this prince some years; but a war breaking out, he was routed in a
set battle, in which Williams was his companion. In the pursuit, the
poor Welchman, finding he could not get off, clapped his musket at the
foot of a tree, and climbing up, he capitulated. He was now terribly
afraid of being cut to pieces, for he had shot and wounded a great
number of the enemy. They, however, promised him good quarter, and kept
their word.

The king of Maratan, who took him, used him as well as any of the former
had done, and carried him always with him to the wars, in which fortune
was more propitious, for the parties Williams commanded had constantly
the better of their enemies, and never returned without great booties of
cattle and slaves, for all the prisoners they take are so, until
redeemed; though these prisoners are, for the most part, women and
children, they seldom giving quarter to any other. The fame of his
bravery and success, spread itself round the country; and his name alone
was so terrible, that the giving out he was at the head of any party,
was giving the enemy an overthrow without a battle.

This reaching the ears of Dempaino, a mighty prince who lived 200 miles
from him, and who had several petty princes tributaries, he sent an
ambassador to demand the white man; but his patron, who had no mind to
part with him, denied that he had any white man with him; that he who
was called so was a native of the country. For the reader’s better
understanding this passage, I must inform him, that there is a race of
what they call white men, who have been settled on Madagascar, time out
of mind, and are descended from the Arabs; but mixing with the negroes,
have propagated a race of mulattoes, who differ in nothing from the
manner of living of the black natives.

To proceed, the ambassador desired to see this man, and Williams coming
to him, being extremely tanned, he had passed for what he was reported,
had he been before apprized of what had been said, to have answered
accordingly, for he spoke the language perfectly; or had the ambassador
not examined him; who, after he had some time viewed him, asked him of
what country he was, and whether it was true that he was one of
Madagascar? Williams answered, he was an Englishman, and was left in the
country, relating the particulars, as I have already set them down,
adding, he had been five years in the island.

The ambassador then told the king, that he must send the white man with
him, for such were the orders of his master, the great Dempaino, who was
lord over most of the kings on the side of the country where he resided;
and that it would be dangerous for him to disobey the commands of so
great a monarch.

The king answered, those who were subject to Dempaino ought to obey his
commands; but for him, he knew no man greater than himself, therefore
should receive laws from none; and with this answer dismissed the
ambassador; who, at his return, reported to his master the very words,
adding, they were delivered in a very haughty strain. Dempaino, who was
not used to have his commands disputed, ordered one of his generals to
march with 6000 men, and demand the white man, and in case of refusal,
to denounce war; that he should send him back an express of it, and he
would follow in person with an army to enforce a compliance.

These orders were put in execution with the greatest despatch and
secrecy; so that the town was invested, before any advice was given of
the approach of an enemy. The general told the king, it was in his
choice to have peace or war with his master, since it depended on the
delivery of the white man. The king, thus surprised, was obliged,
however contrary to his inclinations, to give Williams up to the
general, who returned with him to Dempaino, without committing any
hostilities; though he threatened to besiege the town, and put all but
the women and children to the sword, if the king of Maratan did not pay
the expense of sending for the white man, which he rated at 100 slaves,
and 500 head of cattle. The king objected to this as a hard condition,
and an unjust imposition, but was obliged to acquiesce in it.

He was received by Dempaino with a great many caresses, was handsomely
clothed according to the country manner, had slaves allotted to wait on
him, and every thing that was necessary and convenient; so that king
Dempaino was at the trouble of sending 6000 men, one would think, for no
other end than to show the great value and esteem he had for the
Europeans. He continued with this prince till the arrival of a ship,
which was some years after his leaving Maratan, when the Bedford galley,
a pirate, commanded by Achen Jones, a Welchman, came on the coast, on
board of which ship Williams was permitted to enter. They went to
Augustin, where, laying the ship on shore, they broke her back by
carelessness, and lost her. The crew lived here till the arrival of the
Pelican, another pirate, mentioned in North’s life; some of them went on
board this ship, and steered for the East-Indies. Williams shifted out
of this on board the Mocha frigate, a pirate, commanded by Capt.
Culliford, and made a voyage; then, returning to St. Mary’s they shared
the booty they had got in the Red Sea.

Some of the crew, being West-Indians, having an opportunity, returned
home; but Williams remained here till the arrival and taking of Captain
Fourgette, which has been already mentioned. He was one of those who
took the Speaker, went a voyage in her, and returned to Maratan. Here
the king seeing him, asked him, what present he intended to make him for
former kindness? Williams answered, he had been overpaid by the prince
whom he took him from, and by his services; which answer so irritated
his Maratanian Majesty, that he ordered him to quit his country; and he
could hardly alter that see him with patience.

From hence he went on board the Prosperous, Capt. Howard, commander, who
went to St. Mary’s, and thence to the main, as is said in that pirate’s
life, and was one of the men left behind when they had a design to carry
off Ort Van Tyle. This Dutchman kept him to hard labour, as planting
potatoes, &c. in revenge for the destruction and havoc made in his
plantations by the crew of the Prosperous. He was here in the condition
of a slave six months, at the expiration of which time, he had an
opportunity to run away, leaving his consort, Thomas Collins, behind
him, who had his arm broke when he was taken by the Dutchman.

Having made his escape from a rigid, revengeful master, he got to a
black prince, named Rebaiharang, with whom he lived half a year. He from
hence went and kept company with one John Pro, another Dutchman, who had
a small settlement on shore, till the arrival of the men of war,
commanded by Commodore Richards, who took both Pro and his guest
Williams, put them in irons on board the Severn, till they came to
Johanna, where the captain of the Severn undertook for $2000 to go
against the Mohilians, in which expedition several of the man of war’s
crew were killed, and the two pirates made their escape in a small canoe
to Mohila, where they sheltered themselves awhile in the woods, out of
which they got provisions, and made over for Johanna. Here they
recruited themselves and went away for Mayotta. The king of this island
built them a boat, and giving them provisions and what necessaries they
required, they made for and arrived at Madagascar, where, at Methelage,
in lat. 16 deg. 40 m. or thereabouts, they joined Captain White.

Here they lay about three months; then setting fire to their boat, they
went into White’s, and rounding the north end, came to Ambonavoula. Here
Williams remained till Capt. White bought the ship Hopewell, on board of
which he entered before the mast, and made a voyage to the Red Sea,
towards the end of which he was chosen quarter-master. At their return
they touched at Mascarenhas for provisions, where almost half the
company went ashore and took up their habitations.

From Mascarenhas they steered for Hopewell (by some called Hopeful)
Point, on Madagascar, where, dividing their plunder, they settled
themselves.

Twelve months after, the Charles brigantine Capt. Halsey, came in, as is
mentioned in his life. Williams went on board him and made a voyage. At
their return they came to Maratan, lived ashore, and assisted the king
in his war against his brother, which being ended in the destruction of
the latter, and a pirate lying at Ambonavoula, sending his long-boat to
Manangcaro, within ten leagues of Maratan, Williams and the rest went on
board, and in three months after he had been at Ambonavoula, he was
chosen captain of the Scotch ship, mentioned in Halsey’s life. This ship
he worked upon with great earnestness, and made the Scotch prisoners
labour hard at the fitting her up for a voyage; and she was nearly ready
for sea, when a hurricane forced her ashore, and she was wrecked.

Some time after this he set up and finished a sloop, in which he and ten
of his men designed for Mascarenhas; but missing the island, they went
round Madagascar, to Methelage, where he laid his vessel ashore and
tarried a year; but the king being tired with his morose temper, and he
disagreeing with every body, was ordered to be gone, and accordingly
fitting up his vessel, he put to sea, intending to go round the north
end of the island; but the wind being at E. S. E. and the current
setting to N. W. he put back to a port called the Boyn, within ten
leagues of Methelage, in the same king’s dominions whom he had left. The
governor of this place was descended from the Arabs, and it was here
that the Arabians traded.

When he came to an anchor, he and three of his men (he had but five with
him) went on shore, paddled by two negroes. David Eaton and William
Dawson, two of the men, required a guide, to show them the way to the
king’s town; the governor ordered them one, and at the same time laid an
ambush for them in the road, and caused them to be murdered. When they
had left the Boyn, Williams and Meyeurs, a Frenchman, who also came
ashore in the canoe, went to buy some samsams, which are agate beads. As
they were looking over these goods, a number of the governor’s men came
about them, seized them both, and immediately despatched Meyeurs.
Williams they bound, and tortured almost a whole day, by throwing hot
ashes on his head and in his face, and putting little boys to beat him
with sticks. He offered the governor 2000 dollars for his life, but he
answered, he would have that and the money too; and accordingly, when he
was near expiring, they made an end of him with their lances.

After this barbarous murder, the governor thought of seizing the sloop,
on board of which were no more than two white men, six negro boys, and
some women slaves of the same colour. However, he thought it best to
proceed by stratagem, and therefore putting a goat and some calabashes
of toke on board Williams’ canoe, with twelve negroes armed, and the
sloop negroes to paddle, he sent to surprise her. When the canoe came
pretty near the vessel, they hailed, and asked if they would let them
come on board? One of the men asked Williams’ negroes where the captain
was? He answered, drinking toke with the governor, and sent them
provision and toke. A negro wench advised the white man, whose name was
William Noakes, not to let them come on board, for as four white men
went ashore, and none of them appeared, she suspected some treachery.
However, on the answer made him from the canoe, he resolved to admit
them, and called them on board. No sooner were they come on deck, than
one of them, snatching Noakes’ pistol, shot him through the head, and
seizing the other white man, threw him overboard and drowned him; after
which, being masters of the vessel, they carried her in and rifled her.

The king was at this time hunting, as is his custom to hunt boars three
months in the year; but an account of these murders soon reached him.
However, he continued the accustomed time of his diversion; but when he
returned home, and the whites who were about him demanded justice, he
bade them be quiet, they might depend upon his doing it. He sent to the
governor of Boyn, and told him, he was glad that he had cut off Williams
and his crew, an example he was resolved to follow, and clear the
country of them all; that he had some affairs to communicate to him, and
desired he would come to court as soon as possible, but take care he was
not seen by any of the whites, for fear they should revenge the death of
their companions.

The governor, on these orders, came away immediately, and stopped at a
little town, two miles distant from the king’s, and sent word he there
waited his commands.

The king ordered him to be with him early next morning, before the white
men were out of their beds. He set forward accordingly the next day
betimes, but was seized on the road by negroes placed for that purpose,
and brought bound to the king, who, after having reproached him with the
barbarity of the action he had been guilty of, sent him to the white
men, bidding them put him to what death they pleased; but they sent word
back, he might dispose of the lives of his subjects as he thought fit,
but for their part, they would never draw a drop of blood of any who
belonged to him. Upon which answer the king’s uncle ordered him to be
speared, and he was accordingly thrust through the body with lances. The
king, after this execution, sent to Boyn, and had every thing brought
which had belonged to Williams and his men, and divided it among the
whites, saying, _he was sorry the villain had but one life, to make
atonement for the barbarity he had been guilty of_.


                        CAPTAIN SAMUEL BURGESS.

Captain Samuel Burgess was born in New-York, and had a good education.
He sailed some time in a privateer in the West-Indies, and very often,
the gang he was with, when the time of their cruising was expired, would
make no ceremony of prolonging the commission by their own authority.

By his privateering he got together some little money, and returned
home, where the government having no notice, or at least taking none, of
his piratical practice, in staying beyond the date of his commission, he
went out mate of a ship, in the service of Frederick Phillips, bound to
the island of Madagascar, to trade with the pirates, where they had the
misfortune to lose their ship, and lived 18 months at Augustin, when an
English pirate coming in, the king of the country obliged him to go on
board her, though much against his inclination, for he was tired of a
roving life: but their choice was to go or starve, for the king would
keep them no longer.

He went with this freebooter to the East-Indies, where they made several
rich prizes, and returned to St. Mary’s, where they took in provisions,
wood, and water. Several of their gang knocked off here; but the
captain, Burgess, and the remainder, went away for the West-Indies,
disposed of their plunder on the Spanish coast, and then returning to
New-York, purposely knocked the ship on the head at Sandy Hook, after
they had secured their money ashore.

The government not being informed of their piracy, they lived here
without molestation, and, in a short time, Burgess married a relation of
Mr. Phillips, who built a ship, called the Pembroke, and sent him a
second time to Madagascar. In his way to this island, he went into the
river of Dilagou on the African coast, where he took in a quantity of
elephant’s teeth; and thence to Augustin, where he met with several of
his old ship-mates, with whom he traded for money and slaves. Leaving
this place, he went to Methelage, where he also took some money and
negroes; and from thence he shaped his course for St. Mary’s, on the
east side, where he also drove a considerable trade with his old
comrades, took several of them passengers, who paid very generously for
their passage; and taking with him an account of what was proper to
bring in another trip, he returned to New-York, without any sinister
accident. This voyage cleared £5000, ship and charges paid.

His owner, encouraged by this success, bade him choose what cargo he
pleased, and set out again. Accordingly he laded with wine, beer, &c.
and returning to Madagascar, arrived at Maratan, on the east side, where
he disposed of a great part of his cargo at his own rates. At Methelage
he disposed of the rest, and returned, clearing for himself and owner,
£10,000, besides 300 slaves he brought to New-York.

After a short stay at home, he set out again on the old voyage, fell in
first with Methelage, where he victualled and traded, and from thence
went round the south end, and sold part of his cargo at a large profit,
to his old acquaintance. He made a trading voyage round the island, and
at St. Mary’s met another ship belonging to his owner, which had orders
to follow his directions. He remained at this port till he had disposed
of the cargoes of both ships. He then shaped his course homewards, with
about twenty pirate passengers, who had accepted the pardon brought by
Commodore Littleton.

In his way he touched at the Cape of Good Hope, for wood, water, and
fresh provision. While he was here, the Loyal Cook, an East-Indiaman,
came in, who made prize of Burgess, and carried him to the East-Indies.
He there would have delivered Burgess’ ship to the governor of Madras,
but the governor would have no hand in the affair, and told the captain,
he must answer to the East-India company and Burgess’ owner for what he
had done.

Most of the pirate passengers thought themselves cleared by the act of
grace; but some, not willing to trust to it, got off with what gold they
could, in a Dutch boat. They who trusted to the pardon, were clapped in
gaol, and died in their irons. I cannot omit the simplicity of one of
them, who had, however, the wit to get off. When he designed to go away,
he looked for his comrade for the key of his chest, to take his gold
with him, which amounted to seventeen hundred pounds; but this comrade
being ashore, he would not break open the chest, for it was a pity, he
said, to spoil a good new lock; so left his money for the captain of the
East-Indiaman.

The news of this capture came to the owner before the ship returned, and
he sued the Company; but at their request, waited for the arrival of the
Loyal Cook, which brought Burgess prisoner to England soon after. The
Captain finding himself in an error, and that what he had done could not
be justified, absconded; and the Company made good the ship and cargo to
the owner. Burgess was set at liberty, continued some time in London,
was impeached, and piracy sworn against him by Culliford, who,
notwithstanding he came home on the act of grace, was committed to
Newgate, tried, and acquitted, though he was beggared.

Burgess’ owner laboured very hard, and expended great sums of money to
save him. However, though he pleaded the necessity of his going on board
the pirate, he was tried and condemned; but by the intercession of the
bishops of London and Canterbury, was pardoned by the queen.

After this, he made a broken voyage to the South Sea, lieutenant of a
privateer, and returning to London, was out of business a whole year. He
then shipped himself as mate on board the Hannah, afterwards called the
Neptune, and went to Scotland to take in her cargo, the owner being of
that country; but before she got thither, he broke, the ship was
stopped, and lay eighteen months before she was disposed of. At length,
being set to sale, six Scotch gentlemen bought her, the old officers
were continued, and she proceeded on her first designed voyage to
Madagascar, in which the captain and Burgess quarrelling, caused the
loss of the ship; for the latter, who was acquainted with the pirates,
when they arrived at Madagascar, instigated them to surprise her. The
manner how, being already set down in Halsey’s life, I need not repeat.

I shall only take notice, that Capt. Miller being decoyed ashore, under
pretence of being shown some trees, fit for masting, Halsey invited him
to a surloin of beef, and a bowl of arrack punch; he accepted the
invitation, with about twenty pirates. One Emmy, who had been a waterman
on the Thames, did not come to table, but sat by, muffled up in a great
coat, pretending he was attacked by the ague, though he had put it on to
conceal his pistols only. After dinner, when Halsey went out, as for
something to entertain his guests, (Miller and his supercargo,) Emmy
clapped a pistol to the captain’s breast, and told him he was his
prisoner. At the same instant, two other pirates entered the room, with
each a blunderbuss in his hand, and told the captain and his supercargo,
that no harm should come to either, if they did not bring it upon
themselves by an useless resistance. While this passed within doors, the
wood being lined with pirates, all Miller’s men, whom he had brought
ashore to fall timber, were secured, but none hurt, and all civilly
treated. When they had afterwards got possession of the ship, in the
manner mentioned before, they set all their prisoners at liberty.

Miller with eleven of his men, was sent off, as is said in Halsey’s
life. The company chose Burgess quarter-master, and shared the booty
they had made out of the Scotch ship, and the Greyhound.

Soon after happened Halsey’s death, who left Burgess executor in trust
for his widow and children, with a considerable legacy for himself; and
the other pirates grumbling at a new comer’s being preferred to all of
them, took from Burgess £3000 of Halsey’s money, and £1200 of his own,
which was his share of the two prizes. Though he had been treated in
this manner, they were idle enough, to give him the command of the
Scotch ship, and ordered him to fit her out with all expedition, and to
take on board some men and goods left in the brigantine. He set to work
on the ship, with full design to run away with her; but some pirates,
who were in another part of the island, being informed of these
proceedings, thought it not prudent to trust him, so he left the ship,
and getting among his old comrades, by their interposition had all his
money returned.

After this he lived five months on the island of St. Mary’s, where his
house was, by accident, burnt down, out of which he saved nothing but
his money. He then went on board David Williams, when he missed the
island of Mascarenhas, and returned to Methelage, where he tarried with
the king, and was one of the men among whom he divided Williams’
effects.

From Methelage he went with a parcel of samsams to Augustin, with which
he bought fifty slaves, whom he sold to the Arabians. In his return to
Methelage, he met Capt. North, in a sloop, with 30 of Miller’s men on
board. These men proposed taking Burgess, who had, as they said,
betrayed, ruined, and banished them their country, by forcing them to
turn pirates; but North would not consent: upon which they confined him,
took Burgess and stripped him of all the money, and then releasing their
captain, gave him £300 as his share, which he returned to Burgess on his
arrival at Methelage.

Burgess lived here two or three years, till he was carried off by some
Dutchmen. They belonged to an East-Indiaman, and were taken by two
French ships, which being bound for Mocha, and short of provisions, came
into Methelage to victual, where they set 80 of their prisoners ashore.
When they parted from this port, they sailed for Johanna, where they
left the Dutch officers, who built a ship, and came back for their men.
Burgess being of great use to them, they took him on board, and steered
for a port, where some Dutch, taken in another ship, were marooned; but
they were wrecked at Youngoul, where Burgess continued 18 months. After
this time was expired, he was desirous of leaving the place, and
addressed himself to the king, who was uncle to the king of Methelage,
he requested his black majesty to send him back to that port, which he
readily complied with, where Burgess continued almost five years,
afflicted with sickness, in which he lost one eye. While he was here,
the Drake pink, of London, came in for slaves. He took Burgess, with
design to carry him home; but Capt. Harvey, in the Henry, which belonged
to the same owners, arriving, and being a stranger to the trade, at the
request of Capt. Maggot, commander of the Drake, and on promise of a
ship when in the West-Indies, he entered as third mate, and continued
with him. Captain Harvey carrying it pretty high, and disagreeing with
the king, lay here nine months before he could slave. Burgess was sent
up to tell the king he had not fulfilled his agreement with Capt.
Harvey. The king resented being reproached by a man whom he had
entertained so many years, and reviled him. He was, however, carried to
dinner with some of the principal blacks, and drank very plentifully
with them of toke, in which it is supposed he was poisoned, for he fell
ill and died soon after, leaving what he had to the care of the chief
mate, for the use of his wife and children.


                        CAPTAIN NATHANIEL NORTH.

Captain North was born at Bermuda, and was the son of a sawyer, which
business he himself was bred up to, but took at last to the seas, at the
age of 17 or 18, shipping himself cook on board a sloop, built at
Bermuda, for some gentlemen of Barbadoes, with design to fit her out for
a privateer. She was bound to her owners, but the master took Santa Udas
in the way, and loaded with salt. When they came to Barbadoes, all the
crew was pressed, and North with his companions were put on board the
Reserve.

The master applied himself to the governor, and got all his men cleared,
North excepted, who, as he was a lad, was neglected, and left on board
the man of war, which soon after sailed for Jamaica. Some time before
the Reserve was relieved from this station, he laid hold of an
opportunity to run away, and shipped himself on board a sugar drover, in
which way of life he continued about two years, and being an able
sailor, though no artist, he was offered to go master of one of these
coasters, which he refused, and went on board a privateer.

The first cruise he made, they took a couple of good prizes, which made
every man’s share very considerable; but North, as he got his money
lightly, so he spent it, making the companions of his dangers the
companions of his diversions, or rather joining himself with them, and
following their example; which all (who are acquainted with the way of
life of a successful Jamaica privateer) know is not an example of the
greatest sobriety and economy. His money being all spent, he took the
same method for a recruit, that is, he went a second time privateering,
and met with such success, that he engaged very heartily in this course
of life, and made several lucky cruises. Some time after, he grew tired,
thought of trading, and shipped himself on board a brigantine, bound for
the Spanish coast, commanded by one Capt. Reesby. This vessel went both
on the trading and privateering account, so that the men shipped for
half wages, and equal shares of what prizes they should make, in the
same manner as to the shares, as on board a privateer. Their trading
answered very poorly, and their privateering business still worse, for
they returned without making any prize. They were forced to leave the
Spanish coast on account of a Spanish guarda-la-costa, of 40 guns and
350 Frenchmen, commanded by a captain of the same nation. When they made
the island of Jamaica, they fell in with Bluefields, off which place two
French privateer sloops were cruising, one of which was formerly a
privateer of Jamaica, called the Paradox. They immediately clapped
Captain Reesby on board, taking him for a trader from the Spanish coast,
and weakly manned. However, they were soon sensible of the mistake, for
Reesby took one of them, and the other was obliged to a good pair of
heels for his safety. Reesby lost 10 men killed outright in the
engagement, and had 7 wounded. The latter, though he had made but a
broken voyage, he put ashore at Bluefields, and ordered great care to be
taken of them, at the owners’ expense. Here he took in fresh provision,
and then beat up to Port Royal, where Reesby paid his men very
honourably, gave them a handsome entertainment, and begged they would
not leave him, as he had a very great value for them all; but for North
particularly, who was a good swimmer, managed a canoe with great
dexterity, and feared nothing.

Upon this desire of the captain’s, North and the greater part tarried
ashore till Capt. Reesby was refitted, and went a second voyage with him
to the coast, at seventeen dollars a month, and no share. They carried
300 negroes, besides bale goods, and disposed of all the slaves and
goods to great advantage. Upon their return to Jamaica, after some stay
on the island, Capt. Reesby not going out again, North went once more a
privateering, and made considerable booty. While North was ashore after
a cruise, he was pressed on board the Mary man of war, made a cruise in
her to the Spanish coast, and returned to Jamaica; but hearing the Mary
was soon to go to England, he, and three more, resolved to swim ashore
from the keys, where the men of war lay, but he was taken as he was
going off the head, and whipped. He, however, found means to make his
escape, before the ship left the island, and went on board the Neptune
sloop, a privateer, commanded by Capt. Lycence, then lieutenant of the
Reserve, who, while the ship was in the carpenter’s hands, got a
commission of the governor to take a cruise. Capt. Moses, who commanded
the Reserve, went on board their sloop, under the command of his
lieutenant, for diversion only. They cruised off Hispaniola, where they
met with a French letter-of-marque, of 18 guns, and 118 men, who had the
day before engaged the Swan man of war, and shook her off. The Neptune
attacked her, and Capt. Moses was one of the first wounded, and carried
down. Lycence ordered to board, but the quarter-master, who steered,
mistook the helm, the sloop fell off, and the French pouring in a volley
of small shot, Capt. Lycence was killed, which being told to Moses, as
the surgeon dressed him, he ordered North to the helm, bid them not to
be discouraged, and he would be upon deck immediately. Accordingly, he
came up as soon as dressed, laid the ship on board, where they made a
very obstinate resistance; but the French captain being killed, who
received eleven shot before he dropped, they, at length, became masters.

The privateer lost 10 men, and 20 were wounded. The French had 50 killed
and wounded, among whom was the captain, who had received two shot, as
he was going down to the surgeon to get his blood stanched, and came
upon deck just as he was boarded, where, encouraging his men, he was
distinguished and aimed at. When they had brought the prize into
Jamaica, as she was an English bottom, built at Bristol, and called the
Crown, the former owners sued to have half the ship and cargo, and
recovered one third.

Capt. Moses’ ship not being fitted, he would take a second cruise in a
privateer, and North went with him. Some time after their return, Capt.
Moses being cruising in the Reserve, North, who was ashore, was pressed
on board the Assistance man of war; and on the Reserve’s coming in,
being recommended by Capt. Moses to his own captain, he was handsomely
treated, and made one of the barge’s crew. He was very easy till the
Assistance was ordered to England, and then, as he was apprehensive of
going into a cold climate, he took his leave and said nothing. He then
went on board a privateer again, and made several prizes, two of which
were English bottoms, and sued for by former owners. North thinking it
hard to venture his life, and have part of his prize money taken away,
and the press being hot in Jamaica, he resolved to sail no more with the
English; but went to Curacoa into the Dutch service, and sailed with a
Spanish trader to the coast of New Spain several voyages. In the last he
made, they were chased ashore by a couple of French sloops, one of which
was commanded by a Dutchman, named Lawrence, who, with his comrade, took
possession of their vessel and rifled her. The crew of the prize called
to them, and asked if they would give them good quarters? which they
promised; took them all on board, and used them very handsomely.

The French gave the prisoners a small sloop they took a while after, and
they returned to Curacoa.

He having now forgot his resentment, returned to Jamaica, and went on
board and cruised in a Spanish barcalonga, of 10 guns, commanded by
Capt. Lovering, born at Jamaica. They cruised three months in the
West-Indies, and making but a small hand of it, they steered for
Newfoundland, to try their fortune on the banks. Here they met a man of
war, who renewed their commission for six months longer. The first prize
they made was a French ketch, with a Spanish pass, and would have passed
for a Spaniard, but by strict search, and threatening the men, they
discovered her to be what she really was, though she had, as a Spaniard,
slipped through the fingers of a man of war before.

They carried their prize into harbour, went again upon a cruise, met
with a French letter-of-marque, a Bristol built ship, called the
Pelican, of 18 guns, and 75 men, half laden with fish. This ship stood
them a long argument; they clapped her on board, and two of their men
entered, but missing lashing, the barcalonga fell astern, and the two
men were made prisoners. However, they came up with her again, clapped
her on board a second time, and carried her into the same port where
they had left the ketch.

They after this put to sea again, and being discovered by the French
settlement ashore, they went into St. Mary’s Bay, where they fell in
with a large French fly-boat, of 800 tons, 80 men, and 18 guns, laden
with fish. They chased and came up with her, under French colours. When
they were pretty near, the Frenchman hailed, and asked whence they came?
A Guernsey-man, at the bowsprit end, answered, _from Petit Guave_, that
they had been cruising on the Banks, and were going into the bay for
refreshment. The Frenchman bade them come no nearer, but send their boat
on board. They keeping on the chase, he fired at them. They did not mind
this, but run up along side and boarded him. The French ran to their
close quarters, and disputed the ship three quarters of an hour, when
they all called for quarters except one man, who would take none, but
ran like a madman into the midst of the English, and wounded several,
though he was soon despatched by their pistols. They carried this prize
to join the others, and turning all the prisoners ashore, except what
were necessary to condemn their prizes, they stood, with a fleet of four
sail, for Rhode-Island.

Here they condemned the fly-boat and ketch, but found great difficulty
in getting the Pelican condemned, the English owners putting in their
claim; but, at length, a Scotch lawyer did their business, upon leaving
£300 in his hands to bear the charge of any future suit. Capt. Lovering
dying here, the ship’s company bought the Pelican, broke up the
barcalonga, sent her owners their shares, and got a commission for the
master to cruise southward as far as the line, and to be valid for 18
months certain, two years allowing for accidents.

They fitted this ship for a long voyage, out of the joint stock of the
company; but iron hoops being scarce in New-England, they were obliged
to take casks hooped with wood, which I mention, because it proved the
ruin of their voyage to the East-Indies for a whole year.

Being fitted for sea, they set sail and steered for the Cape of Good
Hope, which they doubled in the month of June, made the best of their
way to Madagascar, and went into Augustin Bay, where they victualled and
watered; but before this was done it was August, which was too late to
go to the East-Indies; which they proposed to do with design to cruise
on the Moors, not intending to pirate among the Europeans, but honestly
and quietly to rob what Moors fell in their way, and return home with
clean consciences, and clean, but full hands, within the limited time of
their commission.

From Augustin they went to Johanna, and the provision they had salted at
Madagascar not being well done, it began to spoil. This, and their
clothes wanting repair, made them desperately resolve to take the king
of Johanna and make him ransom himself; but the master would not take
charge of the ship, being unacquainted with the coast. They cruised
among the islands, landed at Comaro, and took the town, but found no
booty, excepting some silver chains, and checked linen. From hence they
went to Mayotta, where they took in a Frenchman who had been marooned
there, and maintained by the king. They consulted with him about
surprising and taking the town; but he was averse to it, as he owed him
the obligation of being preserved. However, he was in their hands, and
must do as they would have him. They surrounded the king’s house after
they had been three days in his town, and took him and all the
inhabitants; but the king’s son made his way through the thickest of
them with his cutlass, though he was shot afterwards. The pretence they
made use of for this unjustifiable violence, was, that the king had
poisoned the crew of a ship, which was their consort. He denied it, as
well he might, for they themselves never heard of a ship of the name
they gave this fictitious one. The king they carried on board, the other
prisoners they put into a sort of temple, with a guard over them of 36
men.

The alarm being given in the country, the natives came down in a body,
of some thousands, and attacked the guard; but the ship hearing the
fire, and seeing the hills covered with blacks, discharged several great
guns, loaded with partridge, which made a very great slaughter, and
obliged them to retire.

The king ransomed himself for some silver chains to the value of a
thousand dollars, and for what provision they demanded; and at setting
him ashore, swore allegiance to them as masters of the country, and took
an oath besides, never to poison any more white men.

After this notable expedition, they stayed here a fortnight, though
always on their guard, and then went back for Augustin with about twenty
slaves, which they carried away with them for servants. Here a sickness
coming among them, they built huts ashore. They lost, notwithstanding
all their care and precaution, their captain and thirty men, by the
distemper which they contracted; but it abating, they thought of going
to sea again, but on examining their water casks, they found the hoops
all worm eaten and rotten, so that there was no proceeding; but this
defect was repaired by their cooper, who was an ingenious fellow. He
went into the woods with the Mayotta slaves, and with withes and other
stuff he gathered, fitted them up, and made them tight; in
acknowledgment of which service they chose him captain, and North was
made quarter-master.

At Augustin they picked up some stragglers, among whom was David
Williams, and on a muster, they found they had 105 men. They then made
their vessel a free ship; that is, they agreed every man should have an
equal share in all prizes; and proceeded for the mouth of the Red Sea.

In the night, after they had reached their station, they made two ships;
one was the Mocha frigate, of 40 guns, commanded by Culliford: she had
been an East-Indiaman, under the command of one Capt. Stout; the other
ship was called the Soldada, of 16 guns, the captain’s name Shivers;
they hailed one another, and on both sides gave the same answers, _from
the seas_, and upon agreement, they all lay by that night. In the
morning they consorted, and agreed to make an equal division of all
prizes, which any of the three should take from that time for two months
to come.

The Pelican spared wood, water, and some of her hands to Capt.
Culliford, and here Williams shifted on board him. About ten days after
these three had joined company, a large Moor’s ship, on which they
afterwards mounted 70 guns, hove in sight.

They all gave chase, but the small ship came first up with the Moor, who
exchanged several shot with the Soldada and Pelican; but the Soldada
clapped her on board, and before the Pelican could enter a man, the
Moors called for quarters. In boarding the Moor, she fired a broadside
upon the Soldada, but only two shot hulled her, and killed two men,
which was the only loss they had in taking a thousand prisoners,
passengers and sailors.

All the money was carried on board the Mocha frigate, and divided
between her crew and the Soldada, excluding without other reason than
_sic volumus_, the Pelican from any share. The crew of the Pelican
expostulated with them, and bid them remember they had spared both wood
and water, or the Mocha could not have kept the station. Instead of any
answer, they received a command to be gone, or they would sink them.
They answered, they could not go by themselves, wanting the water and
wood they had spared. The two consorts gave them a thousand dollars, and
some water out of the Moor, telling them to buy wood, where they could
purchase it, and so left the Pelican to herself, going away for the
coast of Malabar, where they put the prisoners and horses they had taken
ashore, sunk the Soldada, and thence went to the Isle of St. Mary’s on
Madagascar. They shared out of this prize a thousand pounds a man in
silver and gold, besides other goods; and the two pirates amounted to
the number of 350 men.

The Pelican kept the same station for some days, when a large Moor ship
hove in sight. They gave chase, and the Moor not suspecting her for an
enemy, did not endeavour to get away. When the Pelican came up, she
fired for the Moor to bring to, which made him set his small sails,
though with the loss of several men; for the Pelican being close up,
brought them down with small arms. When the Moor had, at length, hove
out his small sails, the Pelican could not gain upon him enough to
board, though she was not a pistol shot astern. Whenever she came upon
his lee quarter, the Moor being a tall ship, took away the wind from the
Pelican, and she could never get to windward of him. She plied her fore
chase all this while, and drove the Moor’s from their stern chase, but
could not, as they endeavoured to do, strike the Moor’s rudder, or any
other way disable him. At length by the fear and bad steerage of the
Moor, the Pelican run up alongside of them, but as she missed lashing,
she was obliged to shoot ahead. In the mean while the Moor wore round,
the Pelican put in stays after him, but not staying, and being all in
confusion, wore also; but in this time the Moor had got the start, and
setting all the canvass he could pack on his ship’s back, wronged the
Pelican and got off.

The loss of this ship made the crew almost distracted, and caused for
some time, a great division among them; some cursing the ship for a
heavy sailer, and proposing to return home; others cursing themselves,
and the ill-management by which they missed lashing, and proposed going
to Madagascar, and breaking her up, since as she was a single bottom,
she must be worm eaten; but time, which mollifies the greatest rage,
abated these contentions, and put an end to the animosities which sprung
from their disappointment.

They now resolved for the Malabar coast, on which they took three Moor
ships in a little time. The first they discharged, after taking out 6000
dollars; the second they took for their own use, mounted her with 26
guns, and called her the Dolphin: the third they sold on the same coast
for 18,000 dollars. Their own ship they set adrift. From this coast they
made for Madagascar, and near the island of Mascarenhas lost all their
masts in a hurricane. They put up jury masts, came to St. Mary’s and new
masted. Here they found Captain Culliford, Capt. Shivers, and their
prize, with three merchantmen from America, which had come to trade with
them, one of which was the Pembroke, commanded by Samuel Burgess, and
belonging to Frederick Phillips, merchant, at New-York. The captain of
the Dolphin, and some of the men being weary of this life, went home in
these merchants ships, and the crew chose one Samuel Inless, who lived
on the island, for their captain. They fitted out for the Straits of
Malacca, where they made several prizes of Moor ships, but of little
value to them. North, on board one of the prizes, was separated from the
rest by bad weather, and drove to great distress for water. The Moor
merchant, who was on board with him, and whom he had treated very
humanely, showed him a draught, by which he came to a small island not
far from the Dutch settlement, and watered. The Moor told him, that he
ran the risk of his life should it be known that he had given him a
sight of this draught. In return for this service, when he met with his
companions, he got the Moor’s ship discharged. After this they steered
for Nicobar, near Achen, and, in the way, met a large Danish ship, which
they plundered, and hove down by, cleaned, and returned to Madagascar,
where they shared their booty, which was, besides goods, between 3 and
£400 a man. A month after their arrival, Commodore Littleton’s squadron
appeared in sight, which occasioned their hauling up the Dolphin; and,
as they could not get her so high as they designed, they set fire to
her.

Commodore Littleton brought a pardon for such of the pirates as would
accept it, and many of them did, among whom were Culliford and Shivers,
who went home with merchantmen. North accepted it also, but would not
trust to it, finding the time fixed for their surrender had elapsed
before the men of war arrived.

Most of the pirates having left the island of St. Mary’s, where the
king’s ship lay, North thought it not safe for him to stay, and
therefore putting all he had into the Dolphin’s boat, he designed to
join his comrades on the main of Madagascar; but being overset by a
squall, all the people were lost except himself, who swam ashore, and a
negro woman whom he put on the bottom of the boat.

Being now on the main, and quite naked, he frightened the negroes he met
with, as he got out of the water, for they took him for a sea-devil; but
one women, who had been used to sell fowls at the white men’s houses,
had the courage not to run away, and, when he came near, knew him. She
gave him some of her own clothing, and calling a negro man who carried
her things, and had run into the woods, they helped him to perform his
journey to the dwelling of some white men, which was sixteen miles from
the place where he came on shore. Being quite exhausted, he was kindly
received and clothed by his comrades, whom he remained with till he had
recovered his strength, and then went to a black prince of his
acquaintance, with whom he tarried till the arrival of Capt. Fourgette,
which was full a year.

In this vessel, which I have already said in White’s life was taken, he
went round the north end to the west side, and came into Methelage,
where they surprised the Speaker; the manner of which is also mentioned
in the same life; and, after the death of Capt. Booth, was chosen
captain’s quarter-master, by Bowen, who succeeded in the voyage, and the
consequence of it are already set down, for he was in the Speaker till
she was lost.

The next voyage he made was in the Speedy Return (taken from Capt.
Drummond) in the capacity of company’s quarter-master, with design to
cruise in the Red Sea; but touching at the island of Mayotta, they
consorted with Capt. Howard, whom they met with at the island, as is
already said. From thence they went and victualled at Augustin, having
promised Capt. Bowen to meet him in two months; accordingly returning
thither, and missing him, they went to Mayotta to inquire after him; but
hearing that he was gone a voyage, and as the place of rendezvous was
off the highlands of St. John’s, they steered their course thither, to
join him, and lie for the Moor fleet for Mocha.

In their passage they met with a violent storm, in which they were near
foundering. It beat in their stern, and obliged them to throw over all
their guns (two excepted, which lay in the hold) and forced them into
the gulf of Persia, where they took several small vessels, which they
ripped up to repair their ship. Being very much in want of water, having
staved all their casks, to save themselves in the storm, and meeting
with little in the vessels taken, they hoisted out the canoe to chase a
fishing vessel, that they might be informed where they should find
water. This boat made from them with all their force, but the ship
firing, the people all leaped into the water, some of whom were drowned,
and the rest got ashore, except one man, whom they came up with; but as
soon as they thought to lay hold of him, he dived, and kept them in play
near an hour and a half. They would not shoot him, because it did not
answer their ends; but at length North, who was in the boat, took the
sprit, and struck him as he rose, and broke his jaw. They took him by
these means, brought him on board, sent him to the surgeon, and when
they despaired of his being able to speak, he asked for a pipe of
tobacco, which he smoked, and drank a dram; after which he seemed very
hearty. As the pirates had on board several black slaves, who spoke the
East-India tongue, one of them was ordered to inquire of him where they
might find water, promising him his liberty if he would direct them. On
this promise he carried them to a convenient landing place, where he
showed a well, full of dirt, out of which, after a great deal of trouble
to come at it, they drew but three buckets of water, which sufficed
those only who went on shore, to the number of thirty. Enraged with this
disappointment after so much labour, they threatened their prisoner with
death, who told them, if they would have patience till the sun was set,
they would have plenty, for the spring would rise, and flow all night;
which they found to be the fact, and filled twenty tons of water, and
returned on board, carrying the man with them, for whom they made a
gathering of some goods, and about 30 dollars. These they gave him, and
exacted a promise, that whenever he saw any ship on that coast, which
made the same signals they had made, he would go on board and render
them what service he could, assuring him he would always meet with civil
treatment, and be well rewarded.

After this they cruised in the gulf of Persia some days, in hopes of
meeting their consort, not doubting but she had some share in the storm;
but the time of their partnership having at length expired, and she not
appearing, they steered for the highlands of St. John, near Surat, the
place of rendezvous. When they made the land they spied a ship, and
immediately making all clear for an engagement, they gave chase. The
other ship doing the like, they soon met, and to the great joy of both
parties, she proved their consort. Upon inquiry they found the
Prosperous had been ten days on this station, and had not met with the
storm which had so roughly handled the Speedy Return. On giving an
account of their misfortune, viz. their being obliged to throw over
their guns, and a quantity of provisions, Capt. Howard spared them some
fresh provisions, and expressing great concern for the accident, renewed
his consortship for two months longer; that is, they agreed whatever
prizes were taken should be equally divided between the crews of both
ships. After they had cruised here fourteen days, they spied seven sail
of lofty ships, which proved to be the Moors from Mocha. They both gave
chase, but the Speedy Return being the better sailor, first came up with
one of them, laid her on board and carried her in very little time, with
little more damage them the loss of her bowsprit. The Prosperous
continued the chase, and having Capt. Whaley on board as a pilot, took
another at an anchor, as is related in Capt. Howard’s life.

The Speedy Return steered with her prize for the coast of Malabar,
where, by agreement, she was to wait ten days for her consort. In six
days the Prosperous joined them, but without any prize, having rifled
and dismissed her.

Here they made an equal dividend of their prizes, burnt the Speedy
Return, sunk the Prosperous, went all on board the Moor’s ship, put to
sea, and cruised on this coast, where they made several prizes. When
they came over against Cachine, some black merchants, goldsmiths, and
several Dutchmen, came on board to trade with them, bringing a great
many sequins, and other gold coin, to change for Spanish dollars. As
many of the pirates designed to knock off and return home, they gave 500
dollars for 200 sequins, for the conveniency of close stowage about
them. The goldsmiths set up their forges on board the ship, and were
fully employed in making them buttons, buckles, and what else they
fancied, so that they had a fair opportunity of putting in what alloy
they thought proper. They here also furnished themselves with a good
quantity of arrack, provisions and stores, and then leaving the coast,
shaped their course for Madagascar, but, in the way, fell in with the
island of Mauritius, and put into a port called the North West Harbour.
Here they wooded and watered. This port affords great abundance of a
poisonous fish called the Red-Snapper, the nature of which was well
known to Capt. Bowen, who persuaded his men not to eat of them, but they
were in port, and then are all commanders, so that this wholesome advice
was thrown away upon them. The captain seeing their obstinacy, and that
they could not be dissuaded, eat with them, choosing rather to share the
same fate, than be left alone to the mercy of the Dutch, as he was
conscious of what he merited. They supped plentifully on the fish, and
drank very heartily after it. Soon after they began to swell in a
frightful manner. The next morning some planters came on board with
fowls, goats, &c. and seeing the pirates in a miserable condition, and
some of these fish lying on the decks, asked if they had not eaten of
them? Being answered in the affirmative, they advised their drinking
plentifully of strong liquors, which was the only way to expel the
poison, which had dispatched them all in less time, had they not done it
after their unfortunate meal. They readily followed this advice, as the
prescription was agreeable, and by this means, with the care of the
surgeons, of whom they had several expert in their business, and stocked
with good medicines, they all recovered, four excepted, who paid their
obstinacy with their lives.

They here heeled their ship, scrubbed, tallowed, and took in what they
wanted. When they had been three months in this port, the governor sent
and desired them to put to sea, for he expected the arrival of the Dutch
East-Indiamen. They accordingly got every thing ready, and went out, but
left several of their men behind them, as we have related in Bowen’s
life.

From hence they steered to Madagascar, and in their passage stopped at
Don Mascarenhas, where they took in a quantity of hogs, goats, sheep,
fowls of all sorts, and green turtle. Captain Bowen here went ashore
with 40 of his men, having obtained the governor’s protection by the
force of presents. These men designed to give over their piracy, and
return home the first opportunities offered them. In six months after
they landed here, Capt. Bowen was taken ill of the dry belly-ache, a
distemper as common here as in the West-India Islands, died, and was
buried in the highway, for the priests would not allow him holy ground,
as he was a heretic.

But to return. When Bowen went ashore, North was chosen captain. The
ceremony of this installation is as follows:—The crew having made choice
of a person to command, either by an unanimous consent, or by a majority
of suffrages, they carry him a sword in a very solemn manner, make him
some compliments, and desire he will take upon him the command, as he is
the most capable among them; that he will take possession of the great
cabin: and, on his accepting the office, he is led into the cabin in
state, and placed at a table, where only one chair is set at the upper
end, and one at the lower end of the table for the company’s
quarter-master. The captain and he being placed, the latter succinctly
tells him, that the company having experience of his conduct and
courage, do him the honor to elect him for their head, not doubting his
behaving himself with his usual bravery, and doing every thing which may
conduce to the public good; in confidence of which, he, in the name of
the company, promises to obey all his lawful commands, and declares him
captain. Then the quarter-master takes up the sword, which he had before
presented him, and he had returned, puts it into his hand, and says,
_This is the commission under you are to act; may you prove fortunate to
yourself and us_. The guns are then fired round shot and all; he is
saluted with three cheers; and the ceremony ends with an invitation from
the captain to such as he thinks fit to have dine with him, and a large
bowl of punch is ordered to every mess.

Capt. North, leaving this island, steered for Madagascar, and came to
Cape Dolphin at the south end, where he anchored, and took on board some
refreshments, but it blowing hard, he was obliged to put to sea, and
leave his boat with 30 men behind him. He ran along the east side of the
island, and came to Ambonavoula, in lat. 17 deg. 38 m. where they put on
shore some of their goods, and settled themselves among the negroes,
several living in a house. Here they lived as sovereign princes among
the inhabitants.

The Moor prisoners they kept on board, and allowed them sufficient fresh
provisions. North privately told the boatswain of the Moors to take
advantage of the land breeze in the night time, and go off with the
ship, and what goods were left on board, or the pirates would soon haul
her up, take every thing on shore, and they never see their own country
again. Accordingly the boatswain, following this advice, laid hold of
the opportunity of a dark night, and communicating his design to the
other Moors, whom he did not acquaint with this advice, as North charged
him not, till he was on the point of executing his design, they weighed
with great silence and stood to sea.

The next morning some of the pirates proposed to go on board and bring
off some iron and other things to trade with in the country; but they
were strangely surprised when they missed the ship. They alarmed the
rest of their comrades, and went in a body to Capt. North, to tell him
what had happened. He answered, if the Moors were gone off with the
ship, it was their own fault; they ought to have left a sufficient
number of hands on board to have secured her; and there was now no
remedy but patience, for they had no vessel to pursue with, except they
thought the canoe proper.

Some of the pirates thought, as she lay in foul ground, the cable might
be cut by some rock, and the ship blown off to sea by that accident. On
starting this, some of them ran up to an eminence, and from thence spied
the ship as far as they could well see, with all sail set, which was a
cruel and convincing proof that their loss was irreparable.

[Illustration: The Moors going to Sea with the Pirates’ Ship, and
leaving them on an Island.       Page 202.]

They endeavoured to make themselves easy, since there was no help; and
transporting their goods to different abodes, at small distances, they
settled themselves, buying cattle and slaves, and lived in a neighbourly
manner, one among another, five years, cleared a great deal of ground,
and planted provisions, such as yams, potatoes, &c. The natives among
whom they fixed, had frequent broils and wars among themselves, but the
pirates interposed, and endeavoured to reconcile all differences, North
deciding their disputes with that impartiality and strict regard to
distributive justice, (for he was allowed, by all, a man of admirable
good natural parts) that he ever sent away, even the party who was cast,
satisfied with the reason, and content with the equity of his decisions.

These inclinations which the pirates showed to peace, and the example
they set of an amicable way of life, (for they carefully avoided all
jars, and agreed to refer all cause of complaint among themselves which
might arise, to a cool hearing before North, and twelve of their
companions,) gave them a great character among the natives, who were
before very much prejudiced against the white men. Nay, in this point of
keeping up a harmony among themselves, they were so exact, that
whosoever spoke but in an angry or peevish tone, was rebuked by all the
company, especially if before any of the country people, though even but
a slave of their own; for they thought, and very justly, that unity and
concord were the only means to warrant their safety; for the people
being ready to make war on one another upon the slightest occasion, they
did not doubt but they would take the advantage of any division which
they might observe among the whites, and cut them off whenever a fair
opportunity offered.

The example they set, and the care they took to accommodate differences
among their neighbours, had calmed all the country round them. After
they had lived here near three years, Capt. North, and some of his
companions, had a mind to visit the country southward, and trade for
more slaves and cattle; to which end, taking a considerable quantity of
powder and arms, beside what they might use, with 50 whites and 300
natives, he set forward on his journey. When they had traveled about 80
miles southward, they came to a nation rich in slaves and cattle, who
inhabited the banks of the largest river on the east side of the island,
called Mangora. With these people he trafficked for a great number of
slaves and cattle, which he purchased for guns and powder. They being at
war when Capt. North came among them, with a neighbouring prince, he was
entreated to give his assistance, for which they, the Mangorians,
promised him 100 slaves with 500 head of cattle, and all the prisoners
they should take. On these conditions he joined them, and marched to a
very large town of the enemy’s, which was naturally very strong, and
esteemed by the natives impregnable, being situated on a high and craggy
rock, which could be ascended by the way only leading to the gate, where
was kept a strong guard. The blacks in North’s army were for leaving
this town unattempted, and marching farther into the country, in search
of booty; but North told them it was not safe to leave a garrison of
enemies at their backs, which would continually infest them by falling
on their rear, and which would be an obstacle to their carrying off what
plunder they might get together; beside, it would be an asylum for all
the country, which would fly thither till they had gathered a body
considerable enough to come down and face them in the open field, which
the enemy might do with reasonable hopes of success, as their men would
be all fresh, while those of his party would be fatigued with marches,
perhaps encumbered by plunder, and worn down with the inconveniences of
lying exposed in the fields.

The chief of his allies allowed his reasons good, were an attempt on the
town practicable, which experience told him was not; for, though several
times besieged, it never could be taken, and it would be the loss of a
great deal of time, and many men’s lives to attempt it. North desired he
would leave the management of this siege to him. The chief answered, he
should do as he pleased, but it was against his judgment to attack a
town which nature herself had fortified, which God Almighty would never
suffer to be taken, and which had, to no purpose, cost the lives of a
number scarce to be told, of his countrymen, in the several attempts
they had made to be masters of it.

North disposed his army, and invested the rock on every side; then sent
word to the town, if they did not surrender, he would give no quarter to
either sex or age. The inhabitants laughed at his message, and told him,
that they did not believe he had learnt the art of flying, and till he
had, they thought themselves very secure from his putting such menaces
in execution.

Out of the white men, North chose 30, whom he set at the head of three
companies, consisting of 100 blacks each; and as they had some
grenade-shells with them, soon dispersed the guard at the foot of the
rock, and made a lodgement. Though the blacks were acquainted with
fire-arms, the shells were entirely new to them, and as they saw their
terrible effect, threw down their arms, and gained the middle of the
rock, where they had another _corps de garde_, though not without some
loss. Those who were at the bottom of the rock being put to flight,
North sent 10 whites and 500 blacks to take that post, and orders to the
other whites to mount the rock, and having beat that guard, if possible,
to enter the town with them. They accordingly ascended in this order, as
the road was so narrow, only three could pass abreast; and as the enemy,
when within cast of a dart, threw down a shower upon them, three unarmed
blacks with their shields marched before three small shot men, and
sheltered them from the enemy’s weapons. These were followed by others,
with the same precaution, the white men being mixed with those who thus
went up, that is to say, one white musketeer to two blacks.

The enemy seemed resolute to defend the pass, but when they had, to no
purpose, spent a number of darts, and had lost some men by the shot,
they swiftly took to the top of the rock, where, joined with fresh men
from the town, they made a stand and show of resistance. North’s men
followed, and pouring in a volley, put them into confusion, which gave
the assailants an opportunity to come near enough to throw in their
shells, half a dozen of which bursting with considerable damage, and the
slaughter of several men, they thought to shelter themselves in the
town, but the inhabitants, fearing the enemy’s entering with them, shut
the gates against both, so that the blacks of North’s army,
notwithstanding all the whites could do to the contrary, made a great
slaughter; however, they saved some, whom they sent prisoners to the
camp, desiring at the same time, a supply of powder to make a petard.

In the mean while the enemy from the town threw a prodigious quantity of
darts, which the besiegers received upon their shields, at least, the
greater part.

The town was again summoned, but they refused to surrender; wherefore
they were obliged to shelter themselves as well as they could, and
expect the powder from the camp; though in the mean while the small shot
from without being warmly plied, the throwing of darts from the town
became less frequent, for no one could show his head but with the
greatest danger.

When the powder came, they cut down and hollowed a tree, which they
filled with powder, and plugged up very tight, and under the protection
of their shields and muskets, got into the gate, under which they dug a
hole large enough to receive it, then setting fire to the fuse, it burst
with a terrible crack, tore their gate to atoms, and left an open
passage, which the besiegers, who had been joined with 500 more blacks,
who came up with the powder entered, and began a very great slaughter.
The whites protected all they could who submitted, but notwithstanding
their diligence, the town was strewed with dead and dying men. At
length, what with being tired, and what with persuasion, the slaughter
ceased, the town was reduced to ashes, and the conquerors returned to
camp with 3000 prisoners, whom his allies led to their own quarters,
where culling out the old women, children, and useless slaves, they sent
them to North, as if by these they thought themselves released from the
promise made to induce his assistance.

When North saw the dishonesty of these people, he sent for their prince,
and told him, “According to agreement all the slaves belonged to him;
nay, according to justice, he alone had a right to them, since he
despaired of taking the town, so far as to dissuade his besieging it;
and that he not only owed to him their success, but even the safety of
his army, and all the plunder they should make in the prosecution of the
war, for reasons already given, and by himself allowed to be good. That
he thought he had allied himself to a people of integrity, but he was
sorry to say, he found himself quite mistaken in his opinion, since they
were so far from making good their treaty, that they sent him out of the
slaves taken, instead of all, those only whom they knew not what to do
with; that they must not imagine him so blind as not to perceive how
disingenuously he was dealt with; or that he wanted either strength or
resolution to resent the usage.”

He then asked what was become of a number of young and handsome women he
had seen among the captives? The prince answered, “that those he
inquired after, were his and his countrymen’s relations, and as such,
they could not consent to, nor could he require, their being made
slaves.”

This answer made, the chief left him. As it was delivered in a pretty
haughty tone, it did not a little nettle both North and his comrades.
The latter were for immediately doing themselves justice; but the former
begged they would have patience, and rely on him. They followed his
advice, and he sent an interpreter, who inquired privately among the
women what relation they bore to the people of the river? The prisoners
answered, that some of their forefathers had intermarried with that
nation.

I must here take notice, that notwithstanding the inhabitants of
Madagascar have but one language, which is common to the whole island,
the difference of the dialect, in different nations, makes it very
difficult for any but the natives, or those who have been a great many
years (more than North and his companions had been) among them, to
understand them perfectly, which is the reason he made use of an
interpreter, as well between him and the chief, as between the slaves
and him.

When he had received this answer from the prisoners, he went to the
prince, and told him, “It was very odd he should make war on his
relations; however, he should keep them, since he declared them such,
till he could prove his right better than the prince could his nearness
of blood; that as he had once taken them, he would try if he could not
support the justice of his claim, and told him therefore to be upon his
guard, for he openly declared, he was no longer the ally, but the
professed enemy of faithless people.”

Saying this, he and his blacks separated themselves from the Mangorians,
and North divided them into companies, with his white men at the head of
each, and ordered them to fire ball over the heads of their late allies.
The first volley was a prodigious astonishment to the Mangorians,
several of whom ran away, but North firing two more immediately, and
marching up to them, brought the prince and the head officers of his
army to him, crawling on all fours. They (as the custom of showing the
greatest submission is among them) kissed the feet of the whites and
begged they would continue their friendship and dispose of every thing
as they thought proper.

North told him, “Deceit was the sign of a mean and coward soul; that had
he, the prince, thought too considerable, what, however, was justly his
due, because not only promised to, but taken by him, he ought to have
expostulated with him, North, and told him his sentiments, which might
have, it was possible, made no division, for neither he nor his men were
unreasonable; but as the prince had not the courage publicly to claim
the slaves, he would have basely stolen them by false pretences of
kindred, it was a sign he did not think such claim justifiable, as
certainly it was not, for all his captains could witness their prince
had agreed the prisoners taken should be given to the whites, and his
companions, a sufficient title, to mention no other. That he had
resolved to show them, by a severe chastisement, the abhorrence those of
his colour have to ingratitude and deceit, and what difference there was
in fighting on the ground of justice, and the supporting wrong and
injury; but as they acknowledged their error, he should not only forgive
but forget what was past, provided no new treachery, in his return,
which he resolved upon, refreshed his memory.” He then ordered them to
bring all the slaves, and they punctually complied without reply.

North chose out the finest and ablest among them, and dividing the whole
number of prisoners into two equal bands, he kept that in which he had
placed the chosen slaves, and sent the other to the prince, telling him,
“though neither fraud nor compulsion could wring a slave from him, yet
justice, as some of his troops had shared the danger, and a generous
temper, had sent him that present, which was half the spoil, though he
could not think of going any farther on with the war; that he ought to
content himself with the taking a town hitherto thought impregnable, and
blame his own conduct, if he should continue in the field, and hereafter
find the want of his assistance.”

The prince and his people admired the penetration, bravery, and
generosity of the whites, and sent them word, “he was more obliged to
them for the lesson they had taught him by their practice, than for the
slaves they had presented him, though he esteemed the present as he
ought. That for the future he should have an abhorrence for every mean
action, since he had learned from them the beauty of a candid, open,
sincere procedure. At the same time, he thanked him for the present, and
not suffering his resentment to go farther than the frightening him into
his duty; for he was sensible his balls were not fired over their heads,
but by orders proceeding from the humanity of the whites, who, he
observed, were tender over the lives of their enemies, contrary to the
custom of his countrymen, who give quarter to none, the females and
infants excepted, that there may hereafter be none to take revenge; and
therefore begged he would suffer their submission to get the better of
his design to depart.” This could not prevail. The whites and their
friends, who came with them, turned their faces towards home, taking
their slaves and cattle with them; and though the Mangorians were
sensibly touched at the obstinacy of North’s resolution, yet they parted
very amicably.

As the whites were returning home with their company, they fell in with
another nation, the Timouses, whose prince joined North, with 500 men,
and swore a strict amity with him and his crew.

The ceremony used among the natives, as it is uncommon, so an account of
it may, perhaps, be agreeable. The parties who swear to each other,
interweave their toes and fingers, so that they must necessarily sit
very close to each other. When they have thus knit their hands and feet,
they reciprocally swear to do each other all friendly offices, to be a
friend or enemy to the friend or enemy of the party to whom they swear;
and if they falsify the oath they make, they imprecate several curses on
themselves, as may they fall by the lance, be devoured by the alligator,
or struck dead by the hand of God. Then an assistant scarifies each of
the contracting parties on the chest, and wiping up the blood with a
piece of bread, gives this bloody bread to each of them to eat, that is,
each eats the blood of the other; and this oath, whether it be with
equal parties, or with a prince and his subject, where the one promises
protection and the other obedience, (which was the nature of that taken
between North and this prince) is looked upon inviolable, and they have
few examples of its being broken; but where any has been wicked enough
to violate this solemn oath, they say, they have been ever punished
according to their imprecations.

As this prince had war with powerful neighbours, he left his country,
taking with him all his great men, wives, and relations, with a company
of about 500 fighting men, followed North, and settled by him, where he
remained two years. During this space, being supplied with arms and
powder by Capt. North, he made several inroads into the countries of his
enemies, and made all he conquered swear allegiance to Capt. North.

At the expiration of two years, Captain Halsey came in with a
brigantine, as is related in the life of Capt. White. This crew, having
made a broken voyage, where discontented with their captain, and desired
North to take the command upon him; but he declined it, saying, Halsey
was every way as capable, and that they ought not to depose a man, whom
they could not tax with either want of courage or conduct; and for his
part, he would never take the command from any one who did not justly
merit dismission, which was not Halsey’s case.

The crew were not, however, satisfied, and they made the same offer to
White, but by North’s industry, they were, at last, prevailed on to
continue their old commander; and as North and his companions had
expended their money in settling their plantations, and wanted clothes,
the former, therefore, accepted the quarter-master’s post under Halsey,
and the others went in the capacity of private gentlemen adventurers, I
mean plain foremast men, as may be gathered in the life of that pirate,
to which I refer for an account of the expedition they made in the Red
Sea. Capt. Halsey on board a prize, left North to command the brigantine
they set out in. The two commanders were separated by a storm, but both
made for Madagascar Halsey got to Ambonavoula, but North fell in with
Maratan, where finding the brigantine was very much worm eaten, and made
a great deal of water, with one consent, they took ashore all their
goods, and laid up their vessel.

The pirates continued here a whole year, when being desirous of going to
Ambonavoula, they asked the king’s assistance to build a boat, and he,
for 1000 dollars, set negroes to work, under the directions of Capt.
North, and a vessel of 15 tons was set up and launched with great
dispatch. In this boat they went to a river, called Manangaro, thirty
leagues to the northward of Maratan. Here some of their comrades came to
them in a boat belonging to the Scotch ship Neptune, and helped to
transport their goods to Ambonavoula, where he had before settled, and
had a woman and three children.

He had not been long returned before his neighbouring natives reported,
that the Timouses, who had followed him from the southward, had a design
to rebel against, and murder him and the other whites, which giving too
easy credit to, he made war upon, and drove these poor people out of the
country.

Some time after he built a sloop, and went to Antonguil, where he
purchased 90 slaves, and took in the Scotch supercargo, Mr. George
Cruikeshank, with a design to carry him to Mascarenhas; but all his
comrades were against it, saying, when he got to Europe, he would prove
their destruction. North answered, that nothing could be more cruel,
after they had taken the greater part of what the poor gentleman had,
than to keep him from his country, family, and friends. For his part,
were he his prisoner he should not ask their consent in doing an act of
humanity, and the only one they were able, towards making him some
reparation, since they could not return his goods, which were parcelled
out into so many shares.

On North’s saying thus much, they put the affair in question to vote,
and there being many who were under obligations to North, and whom he
influenced in favour of the supercargo, 48 out of 54 voted for
discharging him. North having gained this point, the pirates asked if he
also designed to take with him one John Barnard, a young Scotchman, a
great favourite of his, who had been midshipman on board the Neptune, a
thorough seaman, and very capable of taking the command in any voyage.
He answered, there was a necessity for taking him, since he should want
his assistance, as he depended on his knowledge. His companions said
Barnard would certainly give him the slip, which would be a loss to them
all, as he was an excellent navigator, and therefore his detention was
necessary to the common good. To this North answered, that his own
security would oblige his taking care that he should not get from him,
since no other on board was capable of finding the way back to
Ambonavoula.

He went to Mascarenhas, where the supercargo and his negro were put on
shore with all the money he had, which amounted to about 1600 dollars;
for when the pirates made prize of the Neptune, in the manner already
stated, they took none of the money they themselves had before paid for
liquors, &c. either from the captain, supercargo, or any other on board;
for that they looked upon a base, as well as dishonest action; but to
the ship and remaining part of the cargo, they had a fair title, viz.
they wanted both.

North would not suffer Barnard to go ashore. However, to make him amends
for his confinement, he gave him four negroes, whom he sold for 300
dollars, and took care that he should live plentifully and well on
board. North’s business at this island, was to get leave to carry his
children there to be educated in the christian faith, which, after some
rich presents made the governor, he obtained, and returned to
Madagascar. In the voyage, as Barnard was very greatly in his favour,
and his confidant, he told him, his design was to leave his children at
Mascarenhas, and place fortunes for them in the hands of some honest
priest, who would give them a christian education (for he thought it
better to have them papists, than not christians) and would then go back
to Maratan, and endeavour, by his penitence, to make atonement for his
former life and never more go off the island on any account; that he
would give his sloop to Barnard, with 200 dollars, that he might find
some means to return home, since he very wisely refused to join with the
pirates.

When he came on the Madagascar coast, he heard a French ship had touched
there, and left some men behind; upon which account North ran to the
southward 100 leagues out of his way, to inquire after and assist these
people.

He found but one man, whom he took home with him, clothed and maintained
him. When he came back to Ambonavoula, he found the country all in an
uproar, and the rest of his companions preparing for a war with the
natives; but his arrival restored their former quiet. After four months
stay at home, he fitted his sloop to go out and purchase slaves at
Antonguil; but finding few there to his mind, for in two months he
bought but 40, he returned to his settlement. He designed now to carry
his children to Mascarenhas, but being dissuaded by Barnard on account
of the season, he went to Methelage on the west side of the island to
trade for samsams. Having purchased a considerable quantity of them, he
went to Johanna, thence to Mayotta, and returned again to Madagascar;
but not being able to get round the north end, on account of the
current, he put for Mayotta again. On the west side of this island he
put into a port, called Sorez, where some time before, came a ship from
England to trade, commanded by one Price, who going ashore with his
doctor was detained (as was also his boat’s crew) till he redeemed
himself and surgeon, with 200 barrels of powder and 1000 small arms; but
was forced to leave his boat’s crew, not having wherewithal to ransom
them, though the demand was only two small arms for each man. These poor
creatures were afterwards sold to the Arabians. In revenge, North and
his crew landed, burnt a large town, and did all the damage they could.
From Mayotta he went again to Madagascar, where a king of his
acquaintance told him the whites and natives were at war at Ambonavoula.
He bought 30 slaves, refreshed his crew, and went home. On the news of
his arrival, the natives sent to conclude a peace, but he would not
listen to them; on the contrary, raised an army, burnt a number of
towns, and took a great many prisoners.

This success brought the natives to sue in a very humble manner for a
cessation of arms, that a general peace might follow. This he agreed to
about four months after his arrival.

His enemies, having now the opportunity, corrupted some of the
neighbouring natives, and in the night surprised and murdered him in his
bed. His comrades, however, being alarmed, took to their arms, drove the
treacherous multitude before them with great slaughter, and to revenge
North’s death, continued the war seven years, in which time they became
masters of all the country round, and drove out all who did not swear
allegiance to them.

North had his will lying by him, which directed Barnard to carry his
children to Mascarenhas, in his sloop, which he left to him. He was at
the charge of fitting her up, and laid out the greater part of the money
North bequeathed him; but the pirates would not suffer him to stir while
the wars lasted, fearing he would not return, having never joined them
in any piracies; and therefore, by one consent, setting fire to the
sloop, they detained him several years.


                               AN ACCOUNT

  _Of the piracies and cruelties of John Augur, William Cunningham,
    Dennis Mackarthy, William Dowling, William Lewis, Thomas Morris,
    George Bendall, and William Ling, who were tried, condemned, and
    executed at Nassau, (N. P.) on Friday, the 10th of December, 1718.
    Also, some account of the pirates, Vane, Rackham, and others._

About the 20th of July, 1718, Mr. Woodes Rogers, Governor and
Vice-Admiral of the Bahama Islands, being sent from England with the
king’s proclamation and pardon for all pirates who had surrendered by a
time specified in the said proclamation, arrived at Providence. It was
evening when the fleet came off the town of Nassau in the said island,
when Richard Turnley, the pilot, did not judge it safe to venture over
the bar that night, wherefore it was resolved to lay by till morning.

In the mean time, there came some men on board the fleet from off a
little island, called Harbour-Island, adjacent to Providence. The advice
they brought was, that there were near a thousand pirates on shore upon
the island of Providence, waiting for the king’s pardon, which had been
long expected. The principal part of their commanders were Benjamin
Hornygold, Arthur Davis, Joseph Burgess, Thomas Carter, and they were
all in or about the town of Nassau; that the fort was extremely out of
repair, there being only one gun mounted, a nine pounder, and no
accommodation for men, but one little hut or house, which was inhabited
by an old fellow, whom the pirates, in derision, called Governor Sawney.

The fleet was seen from the harbour, as well as the town, so that Capt.
Charles Vane, who had no design of surrendering, but, on the contrary,
had fitted out his ship with a resolution of attempting new adventures,
took the advantage of the night to contrive his escape; and though the
harbour was blocked up, and his ship drew too much water to get out by
the east passage, he shifted his hands, and things of most value, into a
lighter vessel, and charging all the guns of the ship he quitted, with
double, round and partridge, he set her on fire, imagining that some of
the ships, or their boats, might be sent near him, and he might do some
mischief when it should burn down to them.

Those in the fleet saw the light, and heard the guns, and fancied the
pirates on shore were making bonfires, and firing guns for joy that the
king’s free pardon had arrived; and Capt. Whitney, commander of the Rose
man of war, sent his boat with a lieutenant on shore, which was
intercepted by Vane, who carried the crew on board and stripped them of
some stores they had in the boat. He kept them till he got under sail,
which was till day-break, when there was light enough for him to see how
to steer his way through the east passage; which was no sooner done but
he hoisted a black flag, and fired a gun, and then let the lieutenant
and boat’s crew depart and join the fleet.

The fleet got safe into the harbour, and as soon as the lieutenant
arrived on board, and related what had passed, the Buck sloop was
ordered to chase Vane. She made what sail she could through the east
passage after him, having a recruit of men well armed sent to her from
the other ships; but being heavily laden with rich goods, Vane had the
heels of her, which the commodore observing, made a signal for her to
give up the chase and return, which she did accordingly.

They immediately fell to mooring and securing their ships, which took up
the time till night. Next morning the governor went on shore, being
received at his landing by the principal people in the government of the
place, viz. Thomas Walker, Esq. Chief Justice, and Thomas Taylor, Esq.
President of the Council. The pirate captains, Hornygold, Davis, Carter,
Burgess, Currant, and Clark, with some others, drew up their crews in
two lines, reaching from the water side to the fort, the governor and
other officers marching between them. In the mean time, being under
arms, they made a running fire over his head.

Having arrived at the fort, his commission was opened and read, and he
was sworn in governor of the island, according to form.

The next day the governor made out a commission to Richard Turnley, the
chief pilot, to Mr. Salter, a factor, and some others, to go on board
and examine all suspected ships and vessels in the harbour, to take an
inventory of their several ladings, and to secure both ships and cargoes
for the use of the king and company, till such time as a Court of
Admiralty could be called, that they might be lawfully cleared or
condemned by proving which belonged to pirates, and which to fair
traders.

The day following a court-martial was held, in which a military
discipline was settled, in order to prevent surprises, both from
Spaniards and pirates, till such time as the fort could be repaired, and
put into a condition of defence. For this purpose the governor was
obliged to make use of some of the pardoned pirates, such as Hornygold,
Davis, and Burgess, to whom he gave some commands: and George
Fetherston, James Bonney, and Dennis Mackarthy, with some other pirates
of a lower rank, acted under them as inferior officers.

Soon after, the civil government was also settled, some of the principal
officers being appointed justices of the peace; others of inferior
degree, constables and overseers of the ways and roads, which were
overgrown with bushes and underwood, all about the town of Nassau; so
that if an enemy had landed in the night, they might lie in ambuscade in
those covers, and surprise the town; wherefore, several of the common
pirates were employed in clearing them away.

The governor, with some soldiers, guarded the fort, and the inhabitants,
who were formed into trained bands, took care of the town; but as there
was no sort of accommodation to lodge such a number of people, they were
forced to unbend the sails, and bring them on shore, in order to make
tents, till they had time to build houses, which was done with all
possible expedition, by a kind of architecture altogether new.

Those that were built in the fort were done by making six little holes
in the rock, at convenient distances, in each of which was stuck a
forked pole; on these, from one to the other, were placed cross poles or
rafters, which being lathed at top, and on the sides, with small sticks,
were afterwards covered with Palmata leaves, and then the house was
finished; for they did not much trouble themselves about the ornaments
of doors and windows.

In the mean time the repairs of the fort were carried on, and the
streets were ordered to be kept clean, both for health and convenience,
so that it began to have the appearance of a civilized place. A
proclamation was published for the encouragement of all such persons as
should be willing to settle upon the island of Providence, by which
every person was to have a lot of ground of a hundred and twenty feet
square, any where in or about the town of Nassau, that was not before in
the possession of others, provided they should clear said ground, and
build a house tenantable, by a certain time therein limited, which might
be easily done, as they might have timber for nothing. This had the
effect proposed, and a great many immediately fell to work, to comply
with the conditions, in order to settle themselves there.

Many of the pirates were employed in the woods in cutting down sticks to
make palisadoes; and all the people belonging to the ships, officers
excepted, were obliged to work four days in the week on the
fortifications, so that in a short time a strong entrenchment was cast
round the fort, and being well palisadoed, it was rendered tolerably
strong.

But it did not much suit the inclinations of the pirates to be set to
work; and though they had provision sufficient, and had also a good
allowance of wine and brandy to each man, yet they began to have such a
hankering after their old trade, that many of them took opportunities of
seizing periaguas, and other boats, in the night, and making their
escape, so that in a few months, there was not many of them left.

However, when the Spanish war was proclaimed, several of them returned
back again of their own accord, tempted with the hopes of being employed
upon the privateering account, for that place lying near the coast of
Spanish America, and also not far from the Gulf of Florida, seemed to be
a good station for intercepting the Spanish vessels going to old Spain.

They were not mistaken in this supposition; for the governor according
to the power vested in him, did grant commissions for privateering, and
made choice of some of the principal pirates who had continued upon the
island, in obedience to the pardon, for commanders, as being persons
well qualified for such employments, who made up their crews chiefly of
their scattered companions, who were newly returned upon the hopes of
preferment.

About this time a fishing vessel, belonging to the island of Providence,
brought in the master of a ship and a few sailors, whom she had picked
up at sea in a canoe. The said master was called Captain King, who
sailed in a ship called the Neptune, belonging to South-Carolina, laden
with rice, pitch, tar, and other merchandise, bound for London.

The account he gave of himself was, that he was met with by Charles
Vane, the pirate, who carried him into Green Turtle Bay, one of the
Bahama islands, by whom he was plundered of a great part of his cargo,
which, consisting chiefly of stores, was of great use to them; that
afterwards they cut away part of one of the masts of the ship, and fired
a gun down her hold, with intent to sink her; that they took some of his
men into their service, and when they were sailing off, gave him and the
rest a canoe to save themselves; that with this canoe they made shift to
sail from one little island to another, till they had the good luck to
meet the fishing boat which took them up; and that he believed Charles
Vane might still be cruising thereabouts.

Upon this intelligence, the governor fitted out a ship which was named
the Willing Mind, manned with 50 stout hands, well armed, and also a
sloop with 30 hands, which he sent to cruise among those islands, in
search of Vane, the pirate, giving them orders also to endeavour to
recover the ship Neptune, which Capt. King told them had still goods of
considerable value left in her.

They went out accordingly, but never saw Vane. However, they found the
Neptune, which was not sunk as the pirates intended; for the ball they
fired into her stuck in the ballast, without passing through. They
returned with her about the 10th of November; but an unlucky accident
happened to the Willing Mind, occasioned either by the ignorance or
carelessness of the pilot, which bilged in going over the bar.

In the mean time Vane made towards the coast of Hispaniola, living
riotously on board, having an abundance of liquor, and plenty of fresh
provisions, such as hogs, goats, sheep, and fowl, which he got upon easy
terms; for touching at a place called Isleathera, he plundered the
inhabitants of as much of their provision as they could carry away. Here
they cruised to about February, when, near the windward passage of Cape
Mase, they met with a large rich ship of London, called the Kingston,
laden with bale goods, and other rich merchandise, and having several
passengers on board, some English, and some Jews, besides two women.

Towards the north end of Jamaica, they also met with a turtle sloop,
bound in for that island, on board of which (after having first
plundered her) they put the captain of the Kingston, some of his men,
and all the passengers except the two women, whom they detained,
contrary to their usual practice.

The Kingston they kept for their own use; for now their company being
strengthened by a great many recruits, some volunteers and some forced
men out of the Neptune and Kingston, they thought they had hands enough
for two ships. Accordingly they shifted several of their hands on board
the Kingston, and John Rackham, alias Calico Jack, (so called, because
his jackets and drawers were always made of calico) quarter-master to
Vane, was unanimously chosen captain of the Kingston.

The empire of these pirates had not been long thus divided before they
had like to have fallen into a civil war among themselves, which must
have ended in the destruction of one of them. The fatal occasion of the
difference between these two brother adventurers, was this. It happened
that Vane’s liquor was all out, who sending to his brother captain for a
supply, Rackham accordingly spared him what he thought fit; but it
falling short of Vane’s expectation, as to quantity, he went on board of
Rackham’s ship to expostulate with him, so that words arising, Rackham
threatened to shoot him through the head, if he did not immediately
return to his own ship; and told him likewise, that if he did not sheer
off, and part company, he would sink him. Vane thought it best to take
his advice, for he thought the other was bold enough to be as good as
his word, for he had it in his power to be so, his ship being the
largest and strongest of the two. Accordingly they parted, and Rackham
made for the island of Princes, and having great quantities of rich
goods on board, taken in the late prizes, they were divided into lots,
and he and his crew shared them by throwing dice, the highest cast being
to choose first. When they had done, they packed up their goods in
casks, and buried them on shore in the island of Princes, that they
might have room for fresh booty. In the mean time it happening that a
turtle sloop, belonging to Jamaica, came in there, Rackham sent his boat
and brought the master on board of him, and asking him several
questions, the master informed him that war with Spain had been
proclaimed in Jamaica; and that the time appointed by the general pardon
for pirates to surrender, in order to receive the benefit thereof, had
not expired.

Upon this intelligence Rackham and his crew suddenly changed their
minds, and were resolved to take the benefit of the pardon by a speedy
surrender; wherefore, instead of using the master ill, as the poor man
expected, they made him several presents, desiring him to sail back to
Jamaica, and acquaint the governor they were willing to surrender,
provided he would give his word and honour they should have the benefit
of the pardon; which, extensive as it was, they apprehended they were
not entitled to, because they had run away in defiance of it at
Providence. They desired the master also to return with the governor’s
answer, assuring him he should be no loser by the voyage.

The master very willingly undertook the commission, and arriving at
Jamaica, delivered his message to the governor, according to his
instructions; but it happened that the master of the Kingston, with his
passengers, having arrived at Jamaica, had acquainted the governor with
the piracies of Vane and Rackham, before the turtle got thither, who was
actually fitting out two sloops, which were now just ready, in pursuit
of them, so that the governor was very glad to discover, by the
turtler’s message, where Rackham was to be found.

The two sloops, well manned, accordingly sailed out, and found Rackham
in the station where the turtler had described him, but altogether in
disorder, and quite unprepared, either for sailing or fighting, most of
his sails being on shore, erected into tents, and his decks lumbered
with goods. He happened to be on board himself, though most of his men
were ashore, and seeing the two sloops at a distance, bearing towards
him, he observed them with his glass, and fancied he saw on board
something like preparations for fighting. This was what he did not
expect, for he looked for no enemy, and while he was in doubt and
suspense about them, they came so near that they began to fire.

He had neither time nor means to prepare for defence, so that there was
nothing to be done but to run into his boat, and escape to the shore,
which he did accordingly with the few hands he had with him, leaving the
two women on board to be taken by the enemy.

The sloops seized the Kingston, manned her, and brought her into
Jamaica, having still a great part of her cargo left. When she arrived,
the master of her fell to examining what part of the cargo was lost and
what left; he searched also for his bills of lading and cockets, but
they were all destroyed by Rackham; so that the ship being freighted by
several owners, the master could not tell whose property was saved, and
whose lost, till he had fresh bills of parcels of each owner from
England. There was one remarkable piece of good luck which happened in
this affair; there were, amongst other goods, sixty gold watches on
board, and thirty of silver; the pirates divided the silver watches, but
the gold being packed up amongst some bale goods, were never discovered
by them, and the master, in searching, found them all safe.

In the mean time, Rackham and his crew lived in the woods, in very great
suspense what to do with themselves. They had with them ammunition and
small arms, and also some of the goods, such as bales of silk stockings,
and laced hats, with which, it is supposed, they intended to make
themselves fine. They had also two boats and a canoe.

Being divided in their resolutions, Rackham, with six more, determined
to take one of the boats, and make the best of their way for the island
of Providence, and there claim the benefit of the king’s pardon, which
they fancied they might be entitled to, by representing, that they were
carried away by Vane, against their wills. Accordingly they put some
arms, ammunition, and provision, into the best boat, and also some of
the goods, and set sail. They first made the Island of Pines, from
thence got over to the north side of Cuba, where they destroyed several
Spanish boats and launches; one they took, which being a stout sea boat,
they shifted themselves and their cargo into her, sunk their own, and
then stretched over to the island of Providence, where they landed
safely about the middle of May, 1719, where demanding the king’s pardon,
the governor thought fit to allow it them, and certificates were granted
to them accordingly.

Here they sold their goods, and spent the money merrily. When all was
gone, some engaged themselves in privateers, and others in trading
vessels. But Rackham, as captain, having a much larger share than any of
the rest, his money held out a little longer; but happening about this
time to form a criminal acquaintance with one Ann Bonny, a married
woman, he became very extravagant, and found it necessary, to avoid
detection and punishment, to abscond with his mistress.

For this purpose they plotted together to seize a sloop which then lay
in the harbour, and Rackham drew some brisk young fellows into the
conspiracy. They were of the number of the pirates lately pardoned, and
who, he knew, were weary of working on shore, and longed to be again at
their old trade.

The sloop they made choice of was between 30 and 40 tons, and one of the
swiftest sailers that ever was built of that kind. She belonged to one
John Haman, who lived upon a little island not far from Providence,
which was inhabited by no human creature except himself and his family.
His livelihood and constant employment was to plunder and pillage the
Spaniards, whose sloops and launches he had often surprised about Cuba
and Hispaniola, and sometimes brought off a considerable booty, always
escaping by a good pair of heels, insomuch that it became a bye-word to
say, _there goes John Haman, catch him if you can_. His business to
Providence now, was to bring his family there, in order to live and
settle, being weary, perhaps, of living in that solitude, or else
apprehensive, if any of the Spaniards should discover his habitation,
they might land, and be revenged on him for all his pranks.

Ann Bonny was observed to go several times on board this sloop. She
pretended to have some business with John Haman; but always went when he
was on shore, for her true errand was to discover how many hands were on
board, and what kind of watch they kept, and to know the passages and
ways of the vessel.

She discovered as much as was necessary. She found there were but two
hands on board, and that John Haman slept on shore every night. She
inquired of them whether they watched; where they lay; and many other
questions; to all which they readily answered her, as thinking she had
no design but common curiosity.

She acquainted Rackham with every particular, who resolved to lose no
time, and therefore, acquainting his associates, who were eight in
number, they appointed an hour for meeting at night, which was 12
o’clock. They were all true to the roguery, and Ann Bonny was as
punctual as the most resolute, and being all well armed, they took a
boat and rowed to the sloop, which was very near the shore.

The night seemed to favour the attempt, for it was both dark and rainy.
As soon as they got on board, Ann Bonny, having a drawn sword in one
hand, and a pistol in the other, attended by one of the men, went
straight to the cabin where the two fellows lay who belonged to the
sloop. The noise awaked them, which she observing, declared that if they
pretended to resist, or make a noise, she would blow their brains out.

In the mean time, Rackham and the rest were busy heaving in the cables,
one of which they soon got up, and for expedition sake, they slipped the
other, and so drove down the harbour. They passed pretty near the fort,
which hailed them, as did also the guard-ship, asking them where they
were going? They answered, their cable had parted, and that they had
nothing but a grappling on board, which would not hold them; immediately
after which they set a small sail, just to give them steerage way. When
they came to the harbour’s mouth, and thought they could not be seen by
any of the ships, on account of the darkness of the night, they hoisted
all the sail they had, and stood to sea; then calling up the two men,
they asked them if they would be of their party; but finding them not
inclined, they gave them a boat to row themselves ashore, ordering them
to give their service to Haman, and tell him they would send him his
sloop again when they had done with her.

Rackham and his paramour both bore a great spleen to Richard Turnley,
who was gone from Providence, turtling, before they made their escape,
and they knowing what island he was upon, made to the place. They saw
the sloop about a league from the shore, and went on board with six
hands; but Turnley, with his boy, by good luck, happened to be ashore
salting some wild hogs they had killed the day before. They inquired for
him, and hearing where he was, rowed ashore in search of him.

Turnley, from the land, saw the sloop boarded, and observed the men
afterwards making for the shore, and being apprehensive of pirates,
which were very common in those parts, he, with his boy, fled into a
neighbouring wood. The surf being very great, so that they could not
bring their boat to shore, they waded up to the arm-pits, and Turnley,
peeping through the trees, saw them bring arms on shore. Upon the whole,
not liking their appearance, he, with his boy, lay snug in the bushes.

When they had looked about and could not see him, they called him aloud
by name; but he not appearing, they thought it time lost to look for him
in such a wilderness, and therefore returned to their boat, but rowed
again back to the sloop, and took away the sails, and several other
things. They also carried away with them three of the hands, viz.
Richard Connor, the mate, John Davis, and John Howel, but rejected David
Soward, the fourth hand, though he had been an old and experienced
pirate, because he was lame, and disabled by a wound he had formerly
received.

When they had done thus much, they cut away the mast, and towing the
vessel into deep water, sunk her, having first put David Soward into a
boat to shift for himself. He, however, got ashore, and after some time,
found Turnley.

From thence, Rackham stretched over to the Bury Islands, plundering all
the sloops he met, and strengthening his company with several additional
hands, and so went on till he was finally taken and executed at Port
Royal, Jamaica.

About this time, the governor, in conjunction with some factors then
residing at Providence, thought fit to freight some vessels for a
trading voyage. Accordingly the Bachelor’s Adventure, a schooner, Capt.
Henry White, commander; the Lancaster, sloop, Capt. William Greenway,
commander; the May, sloop, Capt. John Augur, commander, of which last
David Soward was owner, (she having been given him by some pirates his
former associates) in which he also sailed this voyage, were fitted out
with a cargo of goods and merchandise, bound for Port Prince, on the
island of Cuba.

The governor thought it advisable, for the benefit of the inhabitants of
Providence, to settle a correspondence with some merchants of Port
Prince, first in order to procure fresh provisions, there being scarce
any upon the island at the governor’s first arrival, and there being at
Port Prince great plenty of cows and hogs, he proposed to get a
sufficient number of each, to stock the island for breed, that the
people for the future might have fresh provision of their own.

They set sail on Sunday, the 5th of October, 1718. The next day they
arrived at an island known by the name of Green Key, lying S. S. E. from
Providence, in lat. 28 deg. 40 m. being distant about 25 leagues. Here
they cast anchor, in order to wait for morning to carry them through
some rocks and shoals which lay in their way, and some hands went ashore
to try to kill something for supper before it should be dark. They
expected to meet some wild hogs, for some time before, one Joseph Bay
and one Sims, put two sows and a boar on said island; for they living at
that time at Providence, and being continually visited by pirates, were
always plundered of their fresh provisions, wherefore they thought of
settling a breed upon Green Key, that they might have recourse to in
time of necessity.

This island is about nine miles in circumference, and about three miles
broad in the widest place. It is overgrown with wild cabbage and Palmata
trees, and has a great variety of other herbs and fruits, so that there
is plenty of food for the nourishment of such animals; but the trees
growing so close together, makes it bad hunting, and they killed but one
hog, which, however, was of a monstrous size.

The hunters returned on board their ships again before seven, having
first divided the hog, and sent part on board each vessel for supper
that night. After supper, Capt. Greenway and Capt. White came on board
of Capt. Augur’s sloop, in order to consult together what time to sail,
and being all of opinion that if they weighed anchor between the hours
of 10 and 11, it would be day before they would come up with the shoals,
they agreed upon that hour for setting sail, and so returned to their
own vessels.

Soon after, Phinehas Bunch, and Dennis Mackarthy, with a great many
others, came from White’s sloop, on board of Augur’s. Their pretence
was, that they came to see Richard Turnley and Mr. James Carr, who had
formerly been a midshipman on the Rose man of war, under Capt. Whitney,
and being a great favourite of Governor Rogers, he had appointed him
supercargo of this voyage. They desired to be treated with a bottle of
beer, for they knew Mr. Carr had some that was very good in his care,
which had been put on board, in order to make presents of, and to treat
the Spanish merchants with.

As it was not suspected they had any thing else in view, Mr. Carr
readily went down, and brought up a couple of bottles of beer. They sat
upon the poop with Capt. Augur in their company, and were drinking their
beer; before the second bottle was out, Bunch and Mackarthy began to
rattle, talk with great pleasure, and much boasting of their former
exploits when they had been pirates, crying up a pirate’s life to be the
only life for a man of any spirit. While they were running on in this
manner, Bunch on a sudden started up, and swore he would be captain of
that vessel. Augur answered him the vessel did not want a captain, for
he was able to command her himself, which seemed to put an end to the
discourse for that time.

Soon after Bunch began to tell what bright arms they had on board their
sloop; upon which, one of Augur’s men handed up some of their cutlasses
which had been cleaned that day. Among them was Mr. Carr’s silver-hilted
sword. Bunch seemed to admire the sword, and asked whose it was? Mr.
Carr made answer, it belonged to him. Bunch replied it was a very
handsome one, and drawing it out, marched about the poop, flourishing it
over his head, and telling Mr. Carr he would return it to him when he
had done with it. At the same time he began to vapour again, and to
boast of his former piracies, and coming near Mr. Carr, struck him with
the sword. Turnley bid him take care what he did, for Mr. Carr would not
take such usage. As they were disputing upon this matter, Dennis
Mackarthy stole off, and, with some of his associates, seized upon the
great cabin, where all the arms lay. At the same time several of the men
began to sing a song with these words. _Did you not promise me, that you
would marry me_—which it seems was the signal agreed upon among the
conspirators for seizing the ship. Bunch no sooner heard them, but he
cried out aloud, _that I will for I am parson_, and struck Mr. Carr
again several blows with his own sword. Mr. Carr and Turnley both seized
him, and they began to struggle, when Dennis Mackarthy, with several
others, returned from the cabin with each a cutlass in one hand, and a
loaded pistol in the other, and running up to them, said, _What! do the
governor’s dogs offer to resist?_ And beating Turnley and Carr with
their cutlasses, threatened to shoot them, at the same time firing their
pistols close to their cheeks, upon which Turnley and Carr begged their
lives.

When they were thus in possession of the vessel, they hailed Capt.
Greenway, and desired him to come on board about urgent business. He,
knowing nothing of what had passed, jumped into his boat, and with two
hands only, rowed on board. Dennis Mackarthy led him into the cabin,
and, as soon as he was there, laid hold of him, telling him he was now a
prisoner, and must submit. He offered to make some resistance; upon
which, they told him all resistance would be vain, for his own men were
in the plot; and, indeed, seeing the two hands who rowed him aboard, now
armed, and joining with the conspirators, he thought it was time to
submit.

As soon as this was done, they sent some hands on board to seize his
sloop, or rather to acquaint his men with what had been done, for they
expected to meet with no resistance, many of them being in the plot, and
the rest, they supposed, not very averse to it; after which, they
decoyed Captain White on board, by the same stratagem they used with
Greenway, and likewise sent on board his sloop, and found his men, one
and all, well disposed for the design; and what was most remarkable was,
that Captain Augur, seeing how things were going, joined with them,
showing himself as well inclined for pirating as the worst of them.

Thus they made themselves masters of the three vessels with very little
trouble. The next thing to be done was to resolve how to dispose of
those who were not of their party. Some were for killing Richard
Turnley, but the majority carried it for marooning, that he might be
starved, and die like a dog, as they called it. Their great spleen to
him was, because he was the person who had piloted the governor into
Providence.

Accordingly, Turnley, with John Carr, Thomas Rich, and some others, were
stripped naked, and tumbled over the vessel’s side into a boat which lay
along side. The oars were all taken out, and they left them nothing to
work themselves ashore with but an old paddle, which, at other times,
served to steer the boat, and so they commanded them to be gone.
However, they made shift to get safe ashore on the island, which, as we
observed before, was quite uninhabited.

The next morning Dennis Mackarthy, with several others, went on shore,
and told them they must come on board again, and they would give them
some clothes to put on. They fancied the pirates began to repent of the
hard usage they had given them, and were willing to return upon such an
errand; but when they got on board again, they found their opinion of
the pirates’ good nature was very ill grounded, for they began with
beating them, and did it as if it were in sport, one having a
boatswain’s pipe, the rest beating them till he piped _belay_.

The true design of bringing them on board again, was to make them
discover where some things lay, which they could not readily find,
particularly Mr. Carr’s watch and silver snuff-box; but he was soon
obliged to inform them in what corner of the cabin they were, and there
they were found, with some journals and other books, which they knew how
to make no other use of than turning them into cartridges. Then they
began to question Thomas Rich about a gold watch which had once been
seen in his possession on shore at Providence; but he protested that it
belonged to Capt. Gale, who was commander of the guard-ship called the
Delicia, to which he then belonged; but his protestations would have
availed him little, had it not been that some on board, who belonged
also to the Delicia, knew it to be true, which put an end to his
beating; and so they were all discharged from their punishment for the
present.

Some time after, fancying the pirates to be in better humour, they
begged for something to eat, for they had none of them had any
nourishment that day or the night before; but all the answer they
received was, that such dogs should not ask such questions. In the mean
time, some of the pirates were very busy endeavouring to persuade
Captain Greenway to engage with them, for they knew him to be an
excellent artist; but he was obstinate and would not. Then it was
proposed to maroon him, which was opposed by some, because he was a
Bermudian, meaning, that he might perhaps swim away, or swim on board
his vessel again, for the Bermudians are all excellent swimmers; but as
he represented, that he could not hurt them by his swimming, he obtained
the favour for himself and the other officers, to be set ashore with
Turnley, Carr, and Rich. Accordingly, they were put into the same boat
without oars, to the number of eight, and were ordered to make the best
of their way on shore.

The pirates, the next day, having examined all their vessels, and
finding that Greenway’s sloop was not fit for their purpose, shifted
every thing out of her. Those that were sent on shore could see from
thence what they were doing, and when they saw them row off, Greenway
swam on board the sloop, it is likely, to see whether they had left any
thing behind them. They perceived him, and fancied he repented refusing
to join with them, and had come to do it now; wherefore some of them
returned back to the sloop, to speak to him, but they found him of the
same opinion he was in before. However, he wheedled them into so much
good humour, that they told him he might have his sloop again, in which,
indeed, they had left nothing except an old mainsail, an old fore-sail,
four small pieces of Irish beef, in an old beef barrel, and about twenty
biscuits, with a broken bucket which was used to draw water in, telling
him that he and the rest must not go on board till they had sailed.

Greenway swam ashore again to give notice to his brothers in distress,
of what had passed. The same afternoon Bunch with several others went on
shore, carrying with them six bottles of wine and some biscuits. Whether
this was done to tempt Greenway again, or no, is hard to say; for though
they talked to him a great deal, they drank all the wine themselves to
the last bottle, and then gave each of the poor creatures a glass
a-piece, with a bit of biscuit, and immediately after fell to beating
them, and so went on board.

While they were on shore, there came in a turtler which belonged to one
Thomas Bennet, of Providence, whereof one Benjamin Hutchins was master.
They soon laid hold of her, for she sailed excellently well. Hutchins
was reputed an extraordinary good pilot among those islands; wherefore
they tempted him to engage with them; at first he refused, but rather
than be marooned, he afterwards consented.

It was now the 9th of October, and they were just preparing to sail,
when they sent on shore, ordering the _condemned malefactors_ to come on
board Greenway’s sloop, the Lancaster. They did so in the little boat
they went on shore in, by the help of the same paddle. They found
several of the pirates there, who told them that they gave them that
sloop to return to Providence, though they let them have no more stores,
than what were named before. They bade them take the fore-sail, and bend
it for a jib, and furl it close down to the bowsprit, and to furl the
mainsail close up to the boom. They did as they were ordered, for they
knew there was no disputing whether it was right or wrong.

Soon after, another detachment came on board, among whom were Bunch and
Dennis Mackarthy, who being either mad or drunk, fell upon them, beating
them, and cutting the rigging and sails to pieces with their cutlasses,
and commanding them not to sail, till they should hear from them again,
threatening if they did, they would put them all to death, if ever they
met them again; and so they went off, carrying with them the boat, which
they sent them first ashore in, and sailed away.

They left them in this miserable condition, without tackle to go their
voyage, and without a boat to get on shore, and having nothing in view
but to perish for want; but as self preservation put them upon exerting
themselves, in order to get out of this deplorable state, they began to
rummage and search the vessel through every hole and corner, to see if
nothing was left which might be of use to them; and it happened by
chance that they found an old hatchet, with which they cut some sticks
sharp to serve for marling-spikes. They also cut out several other
things, to serve instead of such tools as are absolutely necessary on
board a ship.

When they had proceeded thus far, every man began to work as hard as he
could; they cut a piece of cable, which they strung into rope yarns, and
fell to mending their sails with all possible expedition; they also made
a kind of fishing lines of rope yarns, and bent some nails crooked to
serve for hooks; but as they were destitute of a boat, as well for the
use of fishing as for going on shore, they resolved to make a bark log,
that is, to lay two or three logs together, and lash them close, upon
which two or three men may sit very safely in smooth water.

As soon as this was done, some hands went on shore, upon one of the logs
(for they made two of them) who employed themselves in cutting wild
cabbage, gathering berries, and a fruit which the seamen call prickly
pears, for food, while some others went a fishing upon another. Those
who went ashore also carried the old bucket with them, so that whilst
some were busy in gathering things to serve for provision, one hand was
constantly employed in bringing fresh water aboard in the bucket, which
was tedious work, considering how little could be brought at a time, and
that the sloop lay near a mile from the shore.

When they had employed themselves thus, for about four or five days,
they brought their sails and tackle into such order, having also a
little water, cabbage and other things on board, that they thought it
was time to venture to sail. Accordingly they weighed their anchor, and
setting all the sail they had, got out to the harbour’s mouth, when to
their great terror and surprise, they saw the pirates coming in again.

They were much frightened at this unexpected return, because of the
threatenings they had used to them at parting, not to sail without
further orders; wherefore, they tacked about, and ran as close in to the
shore as they could, then throwing out their bark logs, they all put
themselves upon them, and made to land, as fast as they could; but
before they quite reached it, the pirates got so near that they fired at
them, but were too far to do execution. However, they pursued them
ashore; the unhappy exiles immediately took to the woods, and for
greater security climbed up some trees, whose branches were very thick,
and by that means concealed themselves. The pirates not finding them,
soon returned to their boat, and rowed on board the deserted sloop,
whose mast and bowsprit they cut away, and towing into deep water, sunk
her; after which, they made again for shore, thinking that the fugitives
would have been out of their lurking holes, and that they should
surprise them; but they continued still on the tops of the trees and saw
all that passed, and therefore thought it safest to keep their posts.

The pirates not finding them, returned to their vessels, and weighing
their anchors, set sail, steering eastward. In the mean time, the poor
fellows were in despair, for seeing their vessel sunk, they had scarce
any hopes left of escaping the danger of perishing upon that uninhabited
island, where they lived eight days, feeding upon berries, and
shell-fish, such as cockles and periwinkles, sometimes catching a
stingray, a fish resembling mead or thornback, which coming into shoal
water, they could wade near them, and by the help of a stick sharpened
at the end, which they did by rubbing it against the rocks, (for they
had not a knife left among them) they stuck them as if it had been with
a spear.

It must be observed, that they had no means of striking a fire, and
therefore their way of dressing this fish was, by dipping it in salt
water, then laying it in the sun, till it became both hard and dry, and
then they ate it.

After passing eight days in this manner, the pirates returned, and saw
the poor fugitives ashore, who according to custom made to the woods;
but their hearts began to relent towards them, and sending ashore, they
ordered a man to go into the woods single, to call out to them, and
promise them upon their honour, if they would appear, that they would
give them victuals and drink, and not use them ill any more.

These promises, and the hunger which pinched them, tempted them to come
forth, and accordingly they went on board, and they were as good as
their word, for they gave them as much beef and biscuit as they could
eat, during two or three days they were on board, but would not give
them a bit to carry on shore.

There was on board one George Redding, an inhabitant of Providence, who
was taken out of the turtle sloop, and who was a forced man. Being an
acquaintance of Richard Turnley, and knowing that he was resolved to go
shore again, rather than engage with the pirates, and hearing him say,
that they could find food to keep them alive, if they had but fire to
dress it, privately gave him a tinder box, with materials in it for
striking fire, which, in his circumstances, was a greater present than
gold or jewels. Soon after, the pirates put the question to them,
whether they would engage, or be put ashore? And they all agreed upon
the latter: upon which a debate arose among the pirates, whether they
should comply with their request or not; and at length it was agreed,
that Greenway and the other two masters should be kept whether they
would or no; and the rest, being five in number, should, as the pirates
expressed it, have a second refreshment on the varieties of the island.

Accordingly Richard Turnley, James Carr, Thomas Rich, John Cox, and John
Taylor, were a second time marooned, and the pirates, as soon as they
landed them, sailed off, steering eastward, till they came to an island
called Pudden Point, near Long-Island, in lat. 24 degrees, where they
cleaned their vessels.

In the mean time, Turnley and his companions made a much better shift
than they had done before, his friend Redding’s present being of
infinite use to them, for they constantly kept a good fire, with which
they broiled their fish. There were plenty of land crabs and snakes on
the island, which they could eat when they were dressed. Thus they
passed fourteen days; at the end of which the pirates made them another
visit, and they according to custom made for the woods, thinking that
the reason of their return must be, in order to force them to serve
amongst them. But here they were mistaken, for the anger of these
fellows being over, they began to pity them; but going ashore, and not
finding them, they knew they were hid for fear. Nevertheless, they left
upon the shore, where they knew they would come, some stores which they
intended in this fit of good humour to present them with.

The poor islanders had got to their retreat, the tops of the trees, and
saw the pirates go off; upon which they ventured down, and going to the
water side, were agreeably surprised to find a small cask of flour, of
between twenty and thirty pounds, about a bushel of salt, two bottles of
gun powder, several bullets, besides a quantity of small shot, with a
couple of muskets, a very good axe, and also a pot and a pan, and three
dogs, which they took in the turtle sloop; which dogs are bred to
hunting, and generally the sloops which go turtling, carry some of them,
as they are very useful in tracing out the wild hogs. Besides all these,
there were a dozen horn handled knives, of that sort which are usually
carried to Guinea.

They carried all things into the woods, to that part where they had
their fresh water, and where they usually kept, and immediately went to
work with their axe; some cutting down bows, and making poles, so that
four of them were employed in building a hut, while Richard Turnley
taking the dogs and a gun, went a hunting, he understanding that sport
very well. He had not been gone long before he killed a large boar,
which he brought home to his companions, who fell to cutting it up, and
some they dressed for their dinner, and the rest they salted, for
another time.

Thus they lived, as they thought, very happy in respect to their former
condition; but after a few days, the pirates made them another visit,
for they wanted to fill some casks with water. It happened when they
came in, that Turnley was gone a hunting, and the rest all busy at work,
so that they did not see them, till they came into the wood upon them.
Seeing the hut, one of them in wantonness set it on fire, and it was
burnt to the ground; and they appeared inclined to do mischief, when
Richard Turnley, knowing nothing of the matter, happened to return from
hunting, with a fine hog upon his back, as much as he could carry. He
was immediately surrounded by the pirates, who seized upon the fresh
meat, which seemed to put them into better humour. They made Richard Cox
carry it down to their boat, and when he had done, they gave him a
bottle of rum to carry back to his companions to drink their healths,
telling him, that they might get home if they could, or if they stayed
there, they would never trouble them any more.

They were, indeed as good as their word, for sailing away immediately,
they made for Long-Island, and coming up toward the salt ponds there
they saw at a distance in the harbour, three vessels at an anchor, and
supposing them to be either Bermuda or New-York sloops, lying there to
take in salt, they bore down upon them with all the sail they could
make, expecting a good booty. The turtle sloop taken from Benjamin
Hutchins, was by much the best sailer; however, it was almost dark
before she came up with them, and then coming close along side of one of
them, she gave a broadside, with a design to board the next minute, but
received such a volley of small shot in return, as killed and wounded a
great many of the pirates, and the rest, in great surprise and fright,
jumped overboard, to save themselves by swimming ashore.

The truth is, these sloops proved to be Spanish privateers, who
observing the pirates to bear down upon them, prepared themselves for
action. The commander in chief of these three privateers was one who was
called by the name of Turn Joe, because he had once privateered on the
English side. He had also been a pirate, and now acted by virtue of a
commission from a Spanish governor. He was by birth an Irishman, a bold
enterprising fellow, and was afterwards killed in an engagement with one
John Bonnavee, captain of a privateer belonging to Jamaica.

But to return to our story. The sloop was taken, and on board her was
found, desperately wounded, Phineas Bunch, who was the captain. By and
by a second of the pirate sloops came up; she heard the volley, and
supposed it to be fired by Bunch, when he boarded one of the sloops; she
came also along side of one of the Spaniards, and received the welcome
that was given to Bunch, and submitted as soon. A little after, came up
the third, which was taken with the same ease, and in the same manner,
as many of the pirates as could swim, jumping overboard to save
themselves on shore, there not being a man lost on the side of the
Spaniards.

The next day Turn Joe asked them many questions, and finding out that
several amongst them had been forced men, he with the consent of the
other Spanish officers, ordered all the goods to be taken out of a
Spanish launch, and putting some of the wounded pirates into the said
launch, with some provision, water, and other liquors, gave it to the
forced men, to carry them to Providence.

Accordingly George Redding, Thomas Betty, Matthew Betty, and Benjamin
Hutchins, with some others, set sail, and in eight-and-forty hours
arrived in the harbour of Providence. They went on shore immediately,
and acquainted the governor with every thing that had passed, from the
time of their setting out; informing him, that Phineas Bunch, who was
one of the chief authors of all the mischief, was on board the launch.
The governor, with some others, went and examined him, and he confessed
all, wherefore there was no occasion for a trial; and as he had been
pardoned before, and it was necessary to make some speedy example, it
was resolved that he should be executed the next day, but it was
prevented by his dying that night of his wounds.

They also informed the governor of the condition of Turnley, Carr, and
the rest, who were marooned by the pirates upon Green Key Island; upon
which the governor sent for one John Sims, a mulatto man, who had a
two-mast boat in the harbour of Providence, very fit for sailing; and
putting some provisions into her, ordered him to get five or six hands,
and to sail for Green Key, in order to bring off the five men there
marooned.

Sims accordingly made the best of his way, and sailing out in the
morning, arrived at Green Key the next day towards evening. The poor
people on shore saw them, and supposing them to be some of the pirates
returned, thought it best to take to the woods and hide, not knowing
what humour they might be in now. Sims and his ship-mates carried some
provision on shore, not knowing but they might want, and searched about,
calling out to them by their names. After wandering about some time,
they came to the place where the fire was constantly kept; on perceiving
which, they fancied they must be thereabouts, and that it would be best
to wait for them there, and accordingly they sat down, laying the
provisions near them. Turnley, who had climbed to the top of a tree just
by, saw them, and observed their motions, and fancied they were no
enemies who were bringing them provisions, and looking more earnestly,
he knew Sims, the mulatto, whom he was very well acquainted with at
Providence; upon which he called him, who desired him to come down,
telling him the comfortable news, that he was come to the relief of him
and his companions. Turnley made what haste he could to the bottom, and
as soon as he was down, summoned his comrades, who had climbed to the
top of some neighbouring trees, being in haste to communicate the glad
tidings to them. Being all together, the mulatto related to them the
history of what had happened to the pirates.

That night they supped comfortably together upon the provision brought
ashore; but so strange an effect has joy, that scarce one of them slept
a wink that night, as they declared. The next day they agreed to go a
hunting, in order to get something fresh to carry off with them, and
were so successful, that they killed three fine hogs. When they
returned, they made the best of their way on board, carrying with them
all their utensils, and set sail for Providence, whither they arrived in
three days; it being now just seven weeks from the time of their being
first set on shore by the pirates.

The governor, in the mean time, was fitting out a sloop to send to
Long-Island, in order to take those pirates who had saved themselves
near the salt ponds there, which sloop was now ready to sail, and put
under the command of Benjamin Hornygold. Turnley and his companions
embarked on board of her, and care was taken to get as many men as they
could, who were entire strangers to the pirates.

When they arrived at the said island, they run in pretty near the shore,
keeping but few hands on deck, that it might look like a trading vessel,
and those men that were quite unknown to the pirates.

The pirates seeing them, came only two or three of them near the shore,
the rest lying in ambush, not without hopes of finding an opportunity to
seize the sloop, which sent her boat out towards the shore, with orders
to lay off at a little distance, as if she was afraid. Those in ambush
seeing the boat so near, had not patience to stay any longer, but
flocked to the water side, calling out to them to come on shore, and
help them, for they were poor shipwrecked men, perishing for want. Upon
which the boat rowed back again to the sloop.

Upon second thoughts they sent her off again with two bottles of wine, a
bottle of rum, and some biscuit, and sent another man, who was a
stranger to those ashore, with orders to pass for master of the vessel.
As soon as they approached them, the pirates called to them as before,
begging them, for God’s sake to come on shore; they did so, and gave
them the biscuit, wine, and rum, which he said he brought ashore on
purpose to comfort them, because his men told him they were cast away.
They were very inquisitive to know where he was bound. He told them, to
New-York, and that he came in there to take in salt. They earnestly
entreated him to take them on board, and carry them as passengers to
New-York; they being about sixteen in number, he answered, he was afraid
he had not provision sufficient for so great a number; but that he would
go on board and overhaul his provision, and if they pleased, some of
them might go with him, and see how his stock stood; that at least he
would carry some of them, and leave some refreshment for the rest, till
they could be succoured another way, but that he hoped they would make
him some recompense when they should arrive at New-York.

They seemed wonderfully pleased with his proposal, and promised to make
him ample satisfaction for all the charges he should be at, pretending
to have good friends and considerable effects in different parts of
America. Accordingly he took several of them with him in the boat, and
as soon as they got on board he invited them into the cabin, where, to
their surprise, they saw Benjamin Hornygold, formerly a brother pirate;
but what astonished them more, was to see Richard Turnley, whom they had
lately marooned upon Green Key. They were immediately surrounded by
several with pistols in their hands, and clapped in irons.

As soon as this was over, the boat went on shore again, and those in the
boat told the pirates, that the captain would venture to carry them with
what provision he had; at which they appeared much rejoiced, and so the
rest were brought on board, and without much trouble clapped in irons,
as well as their companions.

The sloop had nothing more to do, and therefore set sail, and reaching
Providence, delivered the pirates all prisoners into the fort. A Court
of Admiralty was immediately called, and they were all tried, and nine
received sentence of death, viz John Augur, William Cunningham, Dennis
Mackarthy, William Dowling, William Lewis, Thomas Morris, George
Bendall, William Ling, and George Rounsivel, which last was finally
reprieved and pardoned. The other seven were acquitted, it appearing
that they were forced.

The following is the sentence pronounced upon the prisoners:—

  THE COURT having duly considered of the evidence which hath been
  given both for and against you the said John Augur, William
  Cunningham, Dennis Mackarthy, William Dowling, William Lewis, Thomas
  Morris, George Bendall, William Ling, and George Rounsivel; and
  having also debated the several circumstances of the cases, it is
  adjudged, that you the said John Augur, William Cunningham, Dennis
  Mackarthy, William Dowling, William Lewis, Thomas Morris, George
  Bendall, William Ling, and George Rounsivel, are guilty of the
  mutiny, felony, and piracy, wherewith you and every of you stand
  accused. And the Court doth accordingly pass sentence, that you the
  said John Augur, William Cunningham, Dennis Mackarthy, William
  Dowling, William Lewis, Thomas Morris, George Bendall, William Ling,
  and George Rounsivel, be carried to prison from whence you came, and
  from thence to the place of execution, where you are to be hanged by
  the neck till you shall be _dead, dead, dead_; and God have mercy on
  your souls. Given under our hands this 10th day of December, A. D.
  1718. (Signed)

                          _Woodes Rogers_,
                          _William Fairfax_,
                          _Robert Beauchamp_,
                          _Thomas Walker_,
                          _Wingate Gale_,
                          _Nathaniel Taylor_,
                          _Josias Burgiss_,
                          _Peter Courant_.

After sentence was passed upon the prisoners, the governor, as president
of the court, appointed their execution to be on Friday next, the 12th
inst. at 10 o’clock in the morning.

Whereupon the prisoners prayed for longer time to repent and prepare for
death; but the governor told them, that from the time of their being
apprehended, they ought to have accounted themselves as condemned by the
laws of all nations, which was only sealed now, and that the securing
them hitherto, and the favour that the Court had allowed them in making
as long a defence as they could, wholly took up that time which the
affairs of the settlement required in working at the fortifications;
besides the fatigue thereby occasioned to the whole garrison in the
necessary guards, set over them by the want of a gaol, and the garrison
having been very much reduced by sickness and death since his arrival;
also, that he was obliged to employ all his people to assist in mounting
the great guns, and in finishing the present works, with all possible
despatch, on account of the expected war with Spain; and there being
many more pirates amongst these islands, and this place left destitute
of all relief from any man of war or station ship, joined to other
reasons, too long to enumerate in court, he thought himself
indispensably obliged, for the welfare of the settlement, to give them
no longer time.

The prisoners were then ordered to the place of their imprisonment in
the fort, where leave was given them to send for any persons to read and
pray with them.

On Friday morning each of the prisoners was called in private, to know
if they had any load upon their spirits, for actions committed as yet
unknown to the world, the declaring of which was absolutely required to
prepare themselves for a fit repentance; but they each refused to
declare any thing, as well as making known to the governor, if they knew
of any conspiracy against the government.

Wherefore, about 10 o’clock, the prisoners were released from their
irons, and committed to the charge and care of Thomas Robinson, Esq.
commissioned Provost Marshal for the day, who, according to custom in
such cases, pinioned them, &c. and ordered the guards appointed to
assist him, to lead them to the top of the rampart, fronting the sea,
which was well guarded by the governor’s soldiers and people, to the
number of about 100. At the prisoners’ request, several select prayers
and psalms were read, in which all present joined. When the service was
ended, orders were given to the Marshal, and he conducted the prisoners
down a ladder, provided on purpose, to the foot of the wall, where a
gallows was erected, and a black flag hoisted thereon, and under it a
stage, supported by three butts, on which they ascended by another
ladder, where the hangman fastened the cords. They had three-quarters of
an hour allowed under the gallows, which was spent by them in singing
psalms, and some exhortations to their old consorts, and the other
spectators, who got as near to the foot of the gallows as the marshal’s
guard would suffer them. When the marshal was ordered to make ready, and
all the prisoners expected the launch, the governor thought fit to order
George Rounsivel to be untied, and when brought off the stage, the butts
having ropes about them, were hauled away; upon which, the stage fell,
and the prisoners were suspended.


              _A Short Account of the Prisoners Executed._

First, John Augur, being about 40 years of age, had been a noted
shipmaster at Jamaica, and since among the pirates; but on his accepting
of His Majesty’s act of grace, and recommendations to the governor, he
was, notwithstanding, entrusted with a good vessel and cargo, in which,
betraying his trust, and knowing himself guilty of the indictment, he
all along appeared very penitent, and neither washed, shaved, or shifted
his old clothes, when carried to be executed; and when he had a small
glass of wine given him on the rampart, drank it with wishes for the
good success of the Bahama Islands, and the governor.

The second, William Cunningham, aged 45, had been gunner with Thatch,
the pirate, who, being also conscious of his own guilt, was seemingly
penitent, and behaved himself as such.

The third, Dennis Mackarthy, aged 28, had also been formerly a pirate,
but accepted of the king’s act of grace; and the governor had made him
an ensign of the militia, being recommended as a sober, discreet person,
which commission he had at the time of his joining the pirates, which
very much aggravated his other crimes. During his imprisonment, he
behaved himself tolerably well; but when he thought he was to die, and
the morning came, without his expected reprieve, he shifted his clothes,
and wore long blue ribands at his neck, wrists, knees, and cap; and when
on the rampart, looked cheerfully round him, saying, _He knew the time
when there were many brave fellows on the island, who would not have
suffered him to die like a dog_; and at the same time pulled off his
shoes, kicking them over the parapet of the fort, saying, _He had
promised not to die with his shoes on_; so descended the fort wall, and
ascended the stage, with the agility and address of a prize-fighter.
When mounted, he exhorted the people, who were at the foot of the walls,
to have compassion on him; but, however willing, they saw too much power
over their heads to attempt any thing in his favour.

The fourth, William Dowling, about 24 years of age, had been a
considerable time among the pirates, of a wicked life, which His
Majesty’s act of grace did not reform. His behaviour was very loose on
the stage, and after his death, some of his acquaintance declared, he
had confessed to them, that he had murdered his mother before he left
Ireland.

The fifth, William Lewis, aged about 34 years, as he had been a hardy
pirate and prize-fighter, affected an unconcern at death; but heartily
desired liquors to drink with his fellow-sufferers on the stage, and
with the standers by.

The sixth, Thomas Morris, aged about 22, had been a very incorrigible
youth and pirate, and seemed to have very little anxiety of mind by his
frequent smiles when at the bar. Being dressed with red ribands, as
Mackarthy was with blue, he said, going over the ramparts, _We have a
new governor, but a harsh one_; and a little before he was turned off,
said aloud, _he might have been a greater plague to these islands, and
now he wished he had been so_.

The seventh, George Bendall, aged 18, though he said, _he had never been
a pirate before, yet he had all the villanous inclinations the most
profligate youth could be infected with_. His behaviour was sullen.

The eighth, William Ling, aged about 30, not taken notice of before the
last attempt, behaved himself as became a true penitent, and was not
heard to say any thing besides replying to Lewis, when he demanded wine
to drink, _that water was more suitable to them at that time_.

It was observed that there were but few (besides the governor’s
adherents) among the spectators, who had not deserved the same fate, but
pardoned by His Majesty’s act of grace.




                                   A
                            CORRECT ACCOUNT
                                 OF THE
                             LATE PIRACIES
                     COMMITTED IN THE WEST-INDIES;
                                  AND
                           THE EXPEDITION OF
                           COMMODORE PORTER.


The public mind has been much agitated by the depredations of these
enemies of all laws, human and divine. It is strange, that in this
enlightened age, when the principles of civil liberty are so well
understood, and when the doctrines of the rights of man are gaining so
many adherents both in this country and in Europe, that there should be
found men so lost to every good principle, as to pursue such a predatory
warfare against defenceless people; and with the slightest pretext,
butcher those unfortunate fellow creatures who may fall in their way.
And it is no less astonishing, as piracy does exist, that all civilized
governments have not combined to suppress this horrid practice, and
teach these refractory and deluded men, that the arm of justice is not
shortened, nor the rulers of the earth asleep.

Our government has taken a forward step to arrest these free-booters in
their blood-thirsty projects, and no doubt the expedition which was
under the command of that gallant officer, Commodore Porter, has done
much towards putting down this nefarious practice in the West-India
seas.




                             PIRACIES, &c.


                 MUTINY ON BOARD THE BRITISH SHIP KATE.

The crew, 8 in number, of the ship Kate, Captain Purdy, landed in the
island of Guadaloupe, on the 24th of January, 1821. They slept on the
beach that night, and next morning a planter in the neighbourhood came
to them, and brought them to his house. Their story was uniform, all
said they belonged to the American ship Retrieve, Capt. Jacob Hawes,
belonging to Messrs. Suydam & Wyckoff, merchants, of New-York; that
after 6 weeks boisterous weather, not being able to keep the ship free,
she being very leaky, the Captain had given orders to get the boat in
readiness, and that they were doing it, and getting into the boat about
10 o’clock at night, when the Captain’s son, about 10 years old, fell
overboard in trying to get into the boat, and that the Captain threw
himself into the sea to save him, but both perished, and the ship went
down; that after one night and two days in the boat, they reached the
beach near the Mole, with great hazard of their lives.

They were afterwards escorted to Point Petre, where they were examined
by the Judge, and persisted in the same story; except one French lad,
who privately disclosed the truth to the attorney general.

They had with them all their baggage, and considerable money. Among the
baggage was a Bible, with the label, “Presented by the Merchants’ Seamen
Auxiliary Bible Society, to the ship Kate, of London—Gravesend, 11th
May, 1818.” This, the mate, Thomas Murdock, said was given to him by a
fellow lodger in New-York. The Judge, however, availed himself of this
circumstance to interrogate them a second time. Calling on Murdock, he
said—“There is the Bible belonging to the ship Kate, of London, Capt.
George Purdy, and upon that very same Bible you swear to tell the truth,
and nothing but the truth.” Murdock, much embarrassed, said in broken
words, that he was not accustomed to swear on the Bible, and resisted
some time, when the Judge observed to him, that if he would not answer
to the questions, he would pronounce him guilty immediately; for to
refuse answering the questions of the Court was declaring himself
guilty. Murdock then kissed the Bible. “Since I have taken an oath,
(said he,) on the Bible, I will speak the truth,” and related the real
story, in substance—

“That they belonged to the ship Kate, of London, Capt. George Purdy,
which ship had been chartered in August last, at Halifax, for a voyage
to Berbice and back to Halifax. The ship took a cargo of fish, beef, and
some lumber. They reached Berbice, where the cargo was sold for cash.
The proceeds were put on board in two boxes iron hooped, containing 5600
dollars. The ship sailed for Halifax in ballast. The mate had been
discharged at Berbice, after having some quarrel with the Captain. Six
weeks after sailing, finding constant head winds, and in want of
provisions, the water nearly consumed, the crew asked the Captain what
he intended to do—the Captain told them, he had still some coffee which
he would give them for their support, and that he would try to get to
Bermuda; but after 24 hours, the winds against them, they tried for
New-York, but without success. On the morning of the 8th of January,
three of the crew went and seized the Captain, as he was walking on the
deck, and tied him. They said that he and those that lived in the cabin,
must either jump overboard, or go into the jolly boat along side. They
then embarked the Captain, who wished and asked to go into the cabin for
his cloak and boots, but he was not allowed. They begged earnestly for a
compass; his lady also went on her knees and begged for a compass, but
this was refused also. His lady with their two children, one a boy two
years old, the other a girl four years old, Mr. Robert Meredith, a
passenger, and a mulatto boy named William, steward in the cabin, were
then forced into the boat, with 20 lbs. of bread, two trunks of the
Captain’s and Mr. Meredith’s trunks and two oars, were sent adrift. The
crew were ignorant of their then latitude. After ten days sailing for
the West-Indies, Deseada was the first land he made. They had rigged the
long-boat as a sloop, put in their baggage and money, which had been
equally divided among them, excepting the two lads, who had a share
between them, when two of the crew went below and scuttled the ship.”

Afterwards the rest of the crew confessed their crime. About 1400
dollars were found and lodged at the Register’s office—Murdock said he
buried in the yard of the tavern at the Mole 450 dollars, but the money
could not be found. He had an American protection, said he was born in
New-Brunswick, (N. J.) and had papers from the grand and private lodges
of New-York. The cook was a negro, from Philadelphia, from whence he
went in a schooner to Halifax; his name was Philip Fisher; he stuttered.
One was a French lad; one a London boy, one Welshman, an Irishman, and
two Scotchmen.


              LIST OF ATROCIOUS PIRACIES AND BARBARITIES.

                                                   BOSTON, NOV. 6, 1821.

The brig Cobbessecontee, Capt. Jackson, arrived yesterday from the
Havana, sailed thence on the morning of the 8th ult. and on the evening
of the same day, about four miles from the Moro, was brought to by a
piratical sloop, containing about 30 men. A boat from her, with ten men,
came along side, and soon after they got on board commenced plundering.
They took nearly all the clothing from the Captain and mate—all the
cooking utensils and spare rigging—unrove part of the running
rigging—cut the small cable—broke the compasses—cut the mast’s coats to
pieces—took from the Captain his watch and four boxes cigars—and from
the cargo three bales cochineal and six boxes cigars. They beat the mate
unmercifully, and hung him up by the neck under the main-top. They also
beat the Captain severely—broke a large broad sword across his back, and
ran a long knife through his thigh, so that he almost bled to death.
Capt. Jackson saw the sloop at Regla the day before.

Capt. Jackson informs us, and we have also been informed by other
persons from the Havana, that this system of Piracy is openly
countenanced by some of the inhabitants of that place—who say that it is
a retaliation on the Americans for interfering against the Slave Trade,
and for allowing Patriot privateers to refit in their ports. The
pirates, therefore, receiving such countenance, grow more daring—and
increase in number from the success which has attended this new mode of
filling their pockets.

Capt. Bugnon, who arrived yesterday from Charleston, spoke on the 2d
inst. off the S. Shoal of Nantucket, the brig Three Partners, from
Jamaica for St. John—had been robbed, off Cape Antonio, by a piratical
vessel, of about 35 tons, and 17 men, of clothing, watches, &c. and the
captain was hung up by the neck to the fore-yard arm, till he was almost
dead.

Capt. Bourn, who arrived yesterday, from Cape Haytien, spoke on the 26th
ult. lat. 33, lon. 78, brig Sea Lion, 36 days from Cape Haytien for
Belfast, Ireland, which had been plundered by a pirate in the Gulf.

The brig Harriet, Capt. Dimond, from St. Jago de Cuba for Baltimore,
arrived at Havana on the 16th ult. having been robbed of all her cargo
of sugar, and $4000 in specie, off Cape Antonio, by a boat with 15 men,
having two schooners in co. Capt. D. was hung up by the neck, and
remained senseless for some time after he was taken down.

The Dutch brig Mercury, 77 days from Marseilles, arrived at Havana on
the 16th ult. after having been robbed of $10,000 worth of her cargo, by
a piratical schooner and boat, off Cape Antonio.

Fortunately a U. S. vessel has arrived at the scene of these daring
robberies, and has already protected two fleets. It is to be hoped some
of the villains who have so long preyed with impunity on mercantile
property, and been guilty of the most savage acts, will speedily be
caught and brought to justice.


                           U. S. BRIG SPARK.

 _A letter from a gentleman belonging to this vessel, dated St. Barts,
                          Nov. 3, 1821, says_—

  “We arrived here, after a rather rough passage, in eighteen days
  from Boston, all well. We expect to sail again in two or three days.
  We found here the piratical ship which robbed the Orleans Packet.
  She is now in possession of the Swedish government. She came into
  their possession in the following manner:—The crew landed her cargo
  on a small island near this, from whence it was taken by a schooner
  to St. Thomas;—they then run the ship into Five Island Harbour,
  where all the crew, except two men, deserted her.—The government
  hearing of her being there, sent a guard and took possession of her,
  brought her into this harbour, and confined the two men found in her
  as pirates.—It is said, Capt. Elton has requested the Governor to
  allow him to take them to the United States for trial. This
  piratical ship was originally the U. S. brig Prometheus, which was
  condemned two years since, and was then sold.”

A letter from on board the Hornet, dated at Cape Maise, 31st, October,
says, “The pirate which we took yesterday mounted two long four
pounders, and her crew consisted of twenty gallows-looking
scoundrels.”—After the capture of the Hornet, spoke three merchant
brigs, which probably would have fallen into the hands of the
pirates;—and were very happy at their escape.

_Piratical Forts._—Captain Sisson, from Havana, reports that seventy of
the Pirates belonging to the vessels captured and destroyed by the
Enterprize, have erected two forts on Cape Antonio, for their defence.


           From the American Monthly Magazine, of Feb. 1824.

                                PIRACY.

In the early part of June I sailed from Philadelphia in the schooner
Mary, on a voyage to New-Orleans. My principal object in going round by
sea was the restoration of my health, which had been for many months
declining. Having some friends in New-Orleans whose commercial
operations were conducted on an extensive scale, I was charged with the
care of several sums of money in gold and silver, amounting altogether
to nearly eighteen thousand dollars. This I communicated to the captain,
and we concluded to secure it in the best manner our circumstances would
admit. A plank was accordingly taken off the ribs of the schooner in my
own cabin, and the money being deposited in the vacancy, the plank was
nailed down in its original place, and the seams filled and tarred over.
Being thus relieved from any apprehension that the money would be found
upon us in case of an attack from pirates, my mind was somewhat easier.
What other articles of value I could conveniently carry about with me, I
did so. I had also brought a quantity of bank notes to the amount of
fifteen thousand dollars. Part of these I caused to be carefully sewed
in the left lapel of my coat, supposing that in case of my being lost at
sea, my coat, should my body be found, would still contain the most
valuable of my effects. The balance was carefully quilted into my black
silk cravat.

Our crew consisted of the Captain and four men, with a supply of live
stock for the voyage, and a Newfoundland dog, valuable for his fidelity
and sagacity. He had once saved his master from a watery grave, when he
had been stunned and knocked overboard by the sudden shifting of the
boom. I was the only passenger on board. Our voyage at first was
prosperous, and time went on rapidly. I felt my strength increase the
longer I was at sea, and when we arrived off the southern coast of
Florida, my feelings were like those of another man.

It was towards the evening of the fourteenth day, two hours before
sun-set, that we espied a sail astern of us. As twilight came, it neared
us with astonishing rapidity. Night closed, and all around was
impenetrable darkness. Now and then a gentle wave would break against
our bow and sparkle for a moment, and at a distance behind us, we could
see the uneven glow of light, occasioned by the foaming of the strange
vessel. The breeze that filled our canvass was gentle, though it was
fresh.

We coursed our way steadily through the night; though once or twice the
roaring of the waves increased so suddenly, as to make us believe we had
passed a breaker. At the time it was unaccountable to me, but I now
believe it to be occasioned by the bark behind us, coming rather near in
the darkness of the night.—At midnight I went on deck. Nothing but an
occasional sparkle was to be seen, and the ocean was undisturbed. Still
it was a fearful and appalling darkness, and in spite of my endeavours I
could not compose myself. At the windlass, on the forecastle, three of
the sailors, like myself, unable to sleep had collected for
conversation. On joining them, I found our fears were mutual. They all
kept their eyes steadily fixed upon the unknown vessel, as if
anticipating some dreadful event. They informed me that they had put
their arms in order and were determined to stand or die.

At this moment a flash of light, perhaps a musket burning priming,
proceeded from the vessel in pursuit, and we saw distinctly that her
deck was covered with men. My heart almost failed me. I had never been
in battle, and I knew not what it was. Day at length dawned, and setting
all her canvass, our pursuer gained alarmingly upon us. It was evident
that she had followed us the whole night, being unwilling to attack us
in the dark.—In a few minutes, she fired a swivel and came along side.
She was a pirate. Her boat was lowered, and about a dozed hideous
looking objects jumped in, with a commander at their head. The boat
pushed off, and was nearing us fast, as we arranged ourselves for giving
her a broadside. Our whole stock of arms consisted of six muskets and an
old swivel used as a signal gun, belonging to the Mary, and a pair of
pistols of my own, which I carried in my belt. The pirate boat’s crew
were armed with muskets, pistols, swords, cutlasses, and knives; and
when she came within her own length of us, we fired five of our muskets
and the swivel into her. Her fire was scarcely half given, when she
filled and went down with all her crew. At this success we were inclined
to rejoice, but looking over the pirate schooner, we observed her deck
still swarming with the same description of horrid looking wretches. A
second boat’s crew pushed off, with their muskets pointed directly at us
the whole time. When they came within the same distance as the other, we
fired, but with little, if any effect. The pirate immediately returned
the fire, and with horrid cries jumped aboard of us. Two of our brave
crew were lying dead upon the deck, and the rest of us expected nothing
better. French, Spanish, and English, were spoken indiscriminately, and
all at once. The most horrid imprecations were uttered against us, and
threats that fancy cannot imagine.

A wretch whose black, shaggy whiskers covered nearly his whole face,
whose eyes were only seen at intervals from beneath his bushy eye-brows,
and whose whole appearance was more that of a hell-hound than of a human
being, approached me with a drawn cutlass in his hand. I drew one of my
pistols and snapped it in his face; but it flashed in the pan, and
before I could draw the other, the pirate, with a brutality that would
have disgraced a cannibal, struck me over the face with his cutlass, and
knocked me down. I was too much wounded by the blow to resist, and the
blood ran in torrents from my forehead. In this situation the wretch
seized me by the scalp, and thrusting his cutlass in my cravat, cut it
through completely. I felt the cold iron glide along my throat, and even
now the very thought makes me shudder. The worst idea I had ever formed
of human cruelty seemed now realized, and I could see death stare me in
the face. Without stopping to examine the cravat, he put it in his
pocket, and in a voice of thunder exclaimed “_levez vous?_” I
accordingly rose on my feet, and he pinioned my hands behind my back,
led me to the gunwale of the vessel, and asked another of the gang, in
French, whether he should throw me overboard. At the recollection of
that scene I am still staggered. I endeavoured to call the prospects of
eternity before me, but could think of nothing except the cold and
quiver-less apathy of the tomb. His infamous companion replied, “_Il est
trop bonne heure l’envoyer au diable_,” and led me to the foremast,
where he tied me with my face to the stern of the vessel. The cords were
drawn so tight around my arms and legs, that my agony was excruciating.
In this situation he left me.

[Illustration: The Vessel taken by the Pirates, their Cruelties, &c.
  Page 265.]

On looking round, I found them all employed in plundering and ransacking
every thing we had. Over my left shoulder one of our sailors was strung
up to the yard arm, and apparently in the last agonies of death; while
before me our gallant Captain was on his knees and begging for his life.
The wretches were endeavouring to extort from him the secret of our
money; but for a while he was firm and dauntless. Provoked at his
obstinacy, they extended his arms and cut them off at the elbows. At
this, human nature gave way, and the injured man confessed the spot
where we had concealed our specie.—In a few moments it was aboard their
own vessel. To revenge themselves on our unhappy captain, when they had
satisfied themselves that nothing else was hidden, they spread a bed of
oakum on the deck before, and after soaking it through with turpentine,
tied the captain on it, filled his mouth with the same combustibles, and
set the whole on fire. The cries of the unfortunate man were
heart-rending, and his agonies must have been unutterable; but they were
soon over. All this I was compelled to witness. Heart-sick with the
sight, I once shut my eyes, but a musket discharged close to my ear, was
a warning sufficient to keep them open.

On casting my eyes to the stern of the vessel, I discovered that the
boatswain had been nailed to the deck through his feet, and the body
spiked through to the tiller. He was writhing in the last agonies of
crucifixion.—Our fifth comrade was out of sight during all this tragedy;
in a few minutes, however, he was brought upon the deck blindfolded. He
was then conducted to the muzzle of the swivel, and commanded to kneel.
The swivel was then fired off, and his head was dreadfully wounded by
the discharge. In a moment after, it was agonizing to behold his
torments and convulsions—language is too feeble to describe them. I have
seen men hung upon the gibbet, but their death is like sinking in
slumber when compared with his.

Excited with the scene of human butchery, one of those wretches fired
his pistol to the captain’s dog. The ball struck his shoulder and
disabled him; he finished him by shooting him again, and at last by
cutting out his tongue! At this last hell-engendered act, my blood
boiled with indignation at such savage brutality on a helpless,
inoffensive dog! But I was unable to give utterance or action to my
feelings.

Seeing that the crew had been every one despatched, I began to think
more of myself. My old enemy, who seemed to forget me, once more
approached me; but shockingly besmeared with blood and brains. He had
stood by the side of the unfortunate sailor who suffered before the
swivel, and supported him with the point of his bayonet. He drew a
stiletto from his side, placed its point upon my heart and gave it a
heavy thrust. I felt its point touch my skin; but the quilting of my
bank bills prevented its further entrance. This savage monster then ran
it up my breast, as if intending to divide my lungs, and in doing so,
the bank bills fell upon the deck. He snatched them up greedily, and
exclaimed, “Ah! laissez mois voir ce que reste.” My dress in a few
moments, was ripped to pieces at the peril of my life. He frequently
came so near as to tear my skin and deluge me with blood; but by the
mercy of Providence, I escaped from every danger.—At this moment a heavy
flaw struck the schooner, and I heard one of the pirates say, “Voila un
vaisseau!” They all retreated precipitately, and gaining their own
vessel, was soon out of sight.

Helpless as I now was, I had the satisfaction of knowing that the
pirates had been frightened by the appearance of a sail, but it was
impossible for me to see it. Still tied to the foremast, I knew not what
was my prospect of release.—An hour or two had elapsed after they left
me; and it was now noon. The sun played violently upon my head, and I
felt a languor and debility that indicated approaching fever. My head
gradually sunk upon my breast, when I was shocked by hearing the water
pouring into the cabin windows. The wretches had scuttled the vessel,
and left me pinioned to go down with her. I commended my Spirit to my
Maker, and gave myself up for lost. I felt myself gradually dying away,
and the last thing I remembered was the foaming noise of the waves. This
was occasioned by a ship passing by me. I was taken in, restored to
health, and am now a poor, ruined, helpless man.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The ship Liverpool Packet, Ricker, of Portsmouth, N. H. was boarded on
the 16th off Cape St. Antonio, Cuba, by two piratical schooners; two
barges containing thirty or forty men, robbed the vessel of every thing
moveable, even to her _flags_, rigging, one boat which happened to be
afloat, and having a boy in it which belonged to the ship. They held a
consultation whether they should murder the crew, as they had done
before, or not—in the mean time taking the ship into anchoring ground.
On bringing her to anchor, the crew saw a brig close along side, burnt
to the water’s edge, and three dead bodies floating near her.—The
pirates said they had burnt the brig the day before, and _murdered all
the crew_!—and intended doing the same with them. They said “look at the
turtles, (meaning the dead bodies) you will soon be the same.” They said
the vessel was a Baltimore brig, which they had robbed and burnt, and
murdered the crew as before stated, of which they had little
doubt.—Capt. Ricker was most shockingly bruised by them. The mate was
hung till he was supposed to be dead, but came to, and is now alive.
They told the captain that they belonged in Regla, and should kill them
all to prevent discovery.


                              BRIG DOVER.

    _Extract from the Log-Book of the brig Dover, Capt. Sabins, from
                       Matanzas for Charleston._

Jan. 16, 1822, sea account, at 1 P. M.—Pan of Matanzas bearing S. saw a
boat coming to us from a small drogher, which came out of Matanzas the
night before us, with five Spaniards, armed with long knives, pistols,
cutlasses, &c. When they got within hail, they fired a musket at us,
cheered, and came on board. They were the most villanous looking rascals
that any one had probably ever beheld. They immediately drew their
weapons, and after beating us severely with their cutlasses, drove us
below. They then robbed us of all our clothes except what we had on, our
watches, and every thing of value. We were afterwards called up singly.
Four men with drawn knives stood over the captain, and threatened him if
he did not give up his money, they would kill all hands and burn the
vessel. After robbing the people they commenced plundering the brig.
They broke open the hatches, made us get out our boat and carry their
plunder to their vessel. They took from us one compass, five bags
coffee, one barrel sugar, nearly all our provisions, our colours,
rigging, and cooking utensils. They then ordered us to stand to the
north, or they would overhaul us, murder the crew and burn the vessel.
We made sail, and shortly after were brought to by another boat of the
same character, which fired into us, but left us upon being informed
that we had been already robbed.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  The Porpoise, Capt. Ramage, arrived at Charleston from his
  successful cruise against the Pirates, having recaptured a Baltimore
  schooner which had been in their possession three days, destroyed
  three of their establishments on shore, 12 of their vessels, besides
  two on the stocks, and brought in four prisoners, against whom it is
  supposed there is strong evidence.

It is stated, that a Pirate Captain and his mate quarrelled on the
question of putting to death all captives,—they fought a duel with
muskets, the Captain was killed, and the Mate (who was the advocate of
mercy) succeeded to the command.

The schooner Jane, of Boston, was taken the 24th Jan. by a pirate
schooner.—They were carried into a place where were three more of the
same trade.—The captain and crew were threatened, beat, and the vessel
plundered of much property; after which they were released.

If the Spanish Government is unable to drive the Pirates from their
strong holds in Cuba, the Baltimore Chronicle suggests the necessity of
occupying the island with American forces for that purpose, as robbers
and pirates have a right to enjoy no protection whatever; and in this
case all civilized powers are warranted in carrying the war into the
enemy’s territory.


                           PIRATES CAPTURED.

_Charleston, Feb. 12._—The four pirates brought into this port by the
United States Porpoise, were landed yesterday from that vessel, and
committed to prison. Three of them are Spaniards, the other a
Portuguese; two of the former father and son, the son being only about
18 years of age.

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Charleston, Feb. 14, 1824._—The United States schooner Grampus, Lieut.
Gregory, from a cruise of 4 months in the West-Indies and along the
Spanish Main, arrived at our port yesterday morning, last from Santa
Martha. She has brought in three Pirates, viz. James Maxfield, one of
the crew that robbed the Orleans, of Philadelphia, and Charles Owens and
James Ross, who robbed a Portsmouth schooner of $2600 in the Bite of
Leogane. One of these daring free-booters was delivered up to Lieut. G.
by the Governor of St. Barts, and the other two by the President of
Hayti, for trial by the United States. The G. has boarded several
privateers during her cruise, and traversed a space of 9000 miles,
spreading terror among those wretches whose impotence is equal to their
atrocity, and who only require active pursuit to frighten them out of
visible existence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Mobile, June 1, 1822._—Capt. Carter of the schr. Swan, arrived
yesterday from Havana, reports that on his outward passage from this
port, on the 27th ult. at 8 o’clock, A. M. being then within 30 miles
from Havana, he was boarded by an open boat from the shore, manned with
nine men, who all appeared to be Spanish, armed with muskets, pistols,
cutlasses, and knives, who plundered the vessel of every thing they
could carry off. They also robbed the captain and crew of their
clothing, even stripping the jackets from their backs, and the shoes
from their feet.

The villains would not even spare the property of a Spanish Priest,
passenger on board, but they robbed him also of his clothes, money, and
plate, the value of 800 dollars; they however afterwards, returned his
gown.

A sail heaving in sight, they left the schooner with orders to steer E.
N. E. and not go over three leagues from shore, under pain of death.
From their conversation while on board, it appeared that they intended
to board the schooner again in the evening, run her ashore and burn her,
but she escaped by the darkness of the night.


                   LIEUT. ALLEN’S VICTORY AND DEATH.

     _Extract of a letter from Matanzas, dated November 11, 1822._

“The gallant ALLEN is no more!—You witnessed the promptitude with which
he hastened to relieve the vessels which I informed him had been
captured off this port. He arrived just in time to save five sail of
vessels which he found in possession of a gang of pirates, 300 strong,
established in the Bay of Lejuapo, about 15 leagues east of this. He
fell, pierced by two musket balls, in the van of a division of boats,
attacking their principal vessel, a fine schooner of about eighty tons,
with a long eighteen pounder on a pivot, and four smaller guns, _with
the bloody flag nailed to the mast_. Himself, Capt. Freeman of Marines,
and twelve men, were in the boat, much in advance of his other boats,
and even took possession of the schooner, after a desperate resistance,
which nothing but a bravery almost too daring could have overcome. The
pirates, all but one, escaped by taking to their boats and jumping
overboard, before the Alligator’s boats reached them. Two other
schooners escaped by the use of their oars, the wind being light.

Capt. Allen survived about four hours, during which his conversation
evinced a composure and firmness of mind, and correctness of feeling, as
honourable to his character, and more consoling to his friends than even
the dauntless bravery he before exhibited.”

The Surgeon of the Alligator in a letter to a friend, says, “He
continued giving orders and conversing with Mr. Dale and the rest of us,
until a few minutes before his death, with a degree of cheerfulness that
was little to be expected from a man in his condition. He said he wished
his relatives and his country to know that he had fought well, and added
that he died in peace and good will towards all the world, and hoped for
his reward in the next.”

Lieut. Allen had but few equals in the service. He was ardently devoted
to the interest of his country, was brave, intelligent, and accomplished
in his profession. He displayed, living and dying, a magnanimity that
sheds lustre on his relatives, his friends, and his country.


                           PIRATES ENTRAPPED.

The British schooner Speedwell arrived at Nassau N. P. in November,
bringing in 18 pirates, who had been captured by the Speedwell and her
consort. The schooner had been disguised as a merchantman, and the
pirates, taking her to be an easy prize, came carelessly along side of
her, for the purpose of boarding, when she gave them a hot fire, and
threw them into confusion. Many jumped overboard and were drowned; and
with these and the killed, the loss of the pirates was about 15 or 16.
The remainder of them, 18 in number, were taken prisoners and carried
into Nassau.


                      SAILING OF COMMODORE PORTER.

                                               BALTIMORE, JAN. 17, 1823.

Yesterday Commodore PORTER left this port in the steam galley
Enterprize, to join the squadron fitted out at Norfolk, for the purpose
of suppressing piracy on the coast of Cuba. Every friend of humanity
must wish that the efforts of the distinguished officer who has been
selected to this command will be crowned with success. The means adopted
are certainly the best calculated to effect the object. Frigates and
sloops of war are totally inadequate, by means of their great draft of
water; but the vessels which have been selected by Commodore PORTER, are
precisely calculated to ferret the banditti from their lurking places.
The aid of steam we think a most valuable addition to the squadron, and
from the manner in which the Enterprize has been fitted out, we have
every reason to believe she will completely answer the expectations
formed. Commodore PORTER has been indefatigable since he came here, and
several of our citizens conversant in steam affairs, volunteered their
services to aid him in the necessary equipments for that department. We
learn that she is provided with duplicates of every piece of machinery
which might be carried away in action, and that able and experienced
engineers were also procured for her.

In a very short time we hope to hear of the Commodore’s arrival at his
cruising ground, and we doubt not he will soon put an end to the ravages
of those lawless barbarians.


                       EXECUTION OF THE PIRATES.

Ten of the pirates captured by the British sloop of War Tyne, were
executed at Kingston, Jamaica, on Friday, the 7th of February, 1823.

About a quarter of an hour before day dawn, the wretched culprits were
taken from the jail, under a guard of soldiers from the 50th regiment,
and the City Guard. On their arrival at the wherry wharf, the military
retired, and the prisoners, with the Town Guard were put on board two
wherries, in which they proceeded to Port Royal Point, the usual place
of execution in similar cases. They were there met by a strong party of
military, consisting of 50 men, under command of an officer. They formed
themselves into a square round the place of execution, with the Sheriff
and his officers with the prisoners in the centre. The gallows was of
considerable length, and contrived with a drop so as to prevent the
unpleasant circumstances which frequently occur.

The unfortunate men had been in continual prayer from the time they were
awakened out of a deep sleep till they arrived at that place, where they
were to close their existence.

They all expressed their gratitude for the attention they had met with
from the Sheriff and the inferior officers. Many pressed the hands of
the turnkey to their lips, others to their hearts, and, on their knees,
prayed that God, Jesus Christ, and the Virgin Mary, would bless him and
the other jailers for their goodness. They all then fervently joined in
prayer. To the astonishment of all, no clerical character, of any
persuasion, was present. They repeatedly called out, “Adonde esta el
padre,” (Where is the holy father.)

Juan Hernandez called on all persons present to hear him—he was
innocent; what they had said about his confessing himself guilty was
untrue. He had admitted himself guilty, because he hoped for pardon; but
that now he was to die, he called God, Jesus Christ, the Holy Ghost, the
Virgin Mary, and the Saints, to witness that he spoke truth—that he was
no pirate, no murderer—he had been forced. The Lieutenant of the pirates
was a wretch, who did not fear God, and had compelled him to act.

Juan Gutterez and Francisco de Sayas were loud in their protestations of
innocence.

Manuel Lima said, for himself, he did not care; he felt for the old man
(Miguel Jose.) How could he be a pirate who could not help himself? If
it were a Christian country, they would have pardoned him for his gray
hairs. He was innocent—they had both been forced. Let none of his
friends and relations ever venture to sea—he hoped his death would be a
warning to them, that the innocent might suffer for the guilty. The
language of this young man marked him a superior to the generality of
his companions in misfortune. The seamen of the Whim stated that he was
very kind to them when prisoners on board the piratical vessel. Just
before he was turned off, he addressed the old man—“Adios viejo, para
siempre adios.”—(Farewell, old man, for ever farewell.)

Several of the prisoners cried out for mercy, pardon, pardon.

Domingo Eucalla, the black man, then addressed them. “Do not look for
mercy here, but pray to God; we are all brought here to die. This is not
built for nothing; here we must end our lives. You know I am innocent,
but I must die the same as you all. There is not any-body here who can
do us any good, so let us think only of God Almighty. We are not
children but men, you know that all must die; and in a few years those
who kill us must die too. When I was born, God set the way of my death;
I do not blame any body. I was taken by the pirates, and they made me
help them; they would not let me be idle. I could not show that this was
the truth, and therefore they have judged me by the people they have
found me with. I am put to death unjustly, but I blame nobody. It was my
misfortune. Come, let us pray. If we are innocent, so much the less we
have to repent. I do not come here to accuse any one. Death must come
one day or other; better to the innocent than guilty.” He then joined in
prayer with the others. He seemed to be much reverenced by his fellow
prisoners. He chose those prayers he thought most adapted to the
occasion. Hundreds were witnesses to the manly firmness of this negro.
Observing a bystander listening attentively to the complaints of one of
his fellow wretches, he translated what had been said into English. With
a steady pace, and a resolute and resigned countenance, he ascended the
fatal scaffold. Observing the executioner unable to untie a knot on the
collar of one of the prisoners, he with his teeth undid it. He then
prayed most fervently till the drop fell.

Miguel Jose protested his innocence.—“No he robado, no he matado
ninguno, muero inocente.”—(I have robbed no one, I have killed no one, I
die innocent. I am an old man, but my family will feel my disgraceful
death.)

Francisco Miguel prayed devoutly, but inaudibly. His soul seemed to have
quitted the body before he was executed.

Breti Gullimillit called on all to witness his innocence; it was of no
use for him to say an untruth for he was going before the face of God.

Augustus Hernandez repeatedly declared his innocence, requested that no
one would say he had made a confession; he had none to make.

Juan Hernandez was rather obstinate when the executioner pulled the cap
over his eyes. He said, rather passionately—“Quita is de mis
ojos.”—(Remove it from my eyes.) He then rubbed it up against one of the
posts of the gallows.

Miguel Jose made the same complaint, and drew the covering from his eyes
by rubbing his head against a fellow sufferer.

Pedro Nondre was loud in his ejaculations for mercy. He wept bitterly.
He was covered with the marks of deep wounds.

The whole of the ten, included in the death warrant, having been placed
on the scaffold, and the ropes suspended, the drop was let down. Nondre
being an immense heavy man, broke the rope, and fell to the ground
alive. Juan Hernandez struggled long. Lima was much convulsed. The old
man Gullimillit, and Miguel, were apparently dead before the drop fell.
Eucalla (the black man) gave one convulsion, and all was over.

When Nondre recovered from the fall and saw his nine lifeless companions
stretched in death, he gave an agonizing shriek; he wrung his hands,
screamed “Favor, favor, me matan sin causa. O! buenos Christianos, me
amparen, ampara me, ampara me, no hay Christiano en asta, tiara?”
(Mercy, mercy, they kill me without cause—Oh, good Christians, protect
me, protect me, oh, protect me. Is there no Christian in this land.)

He then lifted his eyes to Heaven, and prayed long and loud. Upon being
again suspended, he was for a long period convulsed. He was an immense
powerful man, and died hard.


                           PIRATES CAPTURED.

The famous pirate, La Cata, was captured, off the Isle of Pines, about
the 1st of March, 1823, by the British cutter Grecian, after a smart
action. The cutter had 50 men—the pirate 100, and 8 guns; it was
believed that about 30 of the crew of the latter were killed, but only
three prisoners were made, the rest making their escape on shore.
Considerable quantities of goods were found on board the prize.

The Grecian conveyed the prisoners to Jamaica, where, it seems, there is
more law to reach cases of piracy than in the United States.


                   LAFITTE, THE NOTED PIRATE, KILLED.

A British sloop of war fell in with and captured a piratical vessel with
a crew of sixty men, under command of the famous LAFITTE. He hoisted the
bloody flag and refused quarter, and fought until nearly every man was
killed or wounded—LAFITTE being among the former.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The schooner Pilot, of Norfolk, was captured by the pirates off
Matanzas, and her crew much abused; but they were put ashore, and the
wretches went on a cruise in the prize, and captured and robbed two
vessels, _within two miles of the Moro castle_, Havana. A few days
after, the U. S. schooner Jackall fell in with her and made a
re-capture, securing, however, only one of the pirates; but several of
them were killed in the action, fighting desperately. Several captures
were made about the same time by Com. Porter’s squadron, which was
actively employed.


                        BATTLE WITH THE PIRATES.

Almost every day furnished accounts evincing the activity of Commodore
Porter, and the officers and men under his command; but for a long time
their industry and zeal was rather shown in the _suppression_ of piracy
than the _punishment_ of it. At length, however, an opportunity offered
for inflicting the latter, as detailed in the following letter, dated
Matanzas, July 10, 1823.

  “I have the pleasure of informing you of a brilliant achievement
  obtained against the pirates on the 5th inst. by two barges attached
  to Commodore PORTER’S squadron, the Gallinipper, Lieut. Watson, 18
  men, and the Musquito, Lieut. Inman, 10 men. The barges were
  returning from a cruise to windward; when they were near Jiguapa
  Bay, 13 leagues to windward of Matanzas, they entered it—it being a
  rendezvous for pirates. They immediately discovered a large schooner
  under way, which they supposed to be a Patriot privateer; and as
  their stores were nearly exhausted, they hoped to obtain some
  supplies from her. They therefore made sail in pursuit. When they
  were within cannon shot distance, she rounded to and fired her long
  gun, at the same time run up the bloody flag, directing her course
  towards the shore, continuing to fire without effect. When she had
  got within a short distance of the shore, she came to, with springs
  on her cable, continuing to fire; and when the barges were within 30
  yards, they fired their muskets without touching boat or man; our
  men gave three cheers, and prepared to board; the pirates,
  discovering their intention, jumped into the water, when the
  bargemen, calling on the name of “ALLEN,” commenced a destructive
  slaughter, killing them in the water and as they landed. So
  exasperated were our men, that it was impossible for their officers
  to restrain them, and many were killed after orders were given to
  grant quarter. Twenty-seven dead were counted, some sunk, five taken
  prisoners by the bargemen, and eight taken by a party of Spaniards
  on shore. The officers calculated that from 30 to 35 were killed.
  The schooner mounted a long nine pounder on a pivot, and 4 four
  pounders, with every other necessary armament, and a crew of 50 to
  60 men, and ought to have blown the barges to atoms. She was
  commanded by the notorious Diableto or Little Devil. This statement
  I have from Lieut. Watson himself, and it is certainly the most
  decisive operation that has been effected against those murderers,
  either by the English or American force.

  “This affair occurred on the same spot where the brave ALLEN fell
  about one year since. The prize was sent to Thompson’s Island.”

A British sloop of war, about the same time, captured a pirate schooner
off St. Domingo, with a crew of 60 men. She had 200,000 dollars in
specie, and other valuable articles on board. The brig Vestal sent
another pirate schooner to New-Providence.


                CAPTURE OF A PIRATICAL STATION IN CUBA.

The U. S. schooners of war Greyhound and Beagle left Thompson’s Island,
June 7, 1823, under the command of Lieuts. Kearney and Newton, and
cruised within the Keys, on the south side of Cuba, as far as Cape Cruz,
touching at all the intermediate ports on the island, to intercept
pirates. On the 21st July, they came to anchor off Cape Cruz, and Lieut.
Kearney went in his boat to reconnoitre the shore, when he was fired on
by a party of pirates who were concealed among the bushes. A fire was
also opened from several pieces of cannon erected on a hill, a short
distance off. The boat returned, and five or six others were manned from
the vessels, and pushed off for the shore, but a very heavy cannonade
being kept up by the pirates on the heights, as well as from the boats
were compelled to retreat. The two schooners were then warped in, when
they discharged several broadsides, and covered the landing of the
boats. After a short time the pirates retreated to a hill that was well
fortified. A small hamlet, in which the pirates resided was set fire to
and destroyed. Three guns, one a four pounder, and two large swivels,
with several pistols, cutlasses, and eight large boats, were captured. A
cave, about 150 feet deep, was discovered, near where the houses were,
and after considerable difficulty, a party of seamen got to the bottom,
where was found an immense quantity of plunder, consisting of
broadcloths, dry goods, female dresses, saddlery, &c. Many human bones
were also in the cave, supposed to have been unfortunate persons who
were taken and put to death. A great deal of the articles were brought
away, and the rest destroyed. About forty pirates escaped to the
heights, but many were supposed to have been killed, from the fire of
the schooners, as well as from the men who landed. The bushes were so
thick that it was impossible to go after them. Several other caves are
in the neighbourhood, in which it was conjectured they occasionally take
shelter.


                      PIRATES TAKEN AND EXECUTED.

A piratical vessel, and her crew of thirty-eight men were captured off
Matanzas on the 16th May, 1825, by a British cutter and a steamboat
fitted out at that place. Several of the pirates were killed, and the
rest sent to Havana for trial. It was ascertained that some of them had
assisted in capturing more than twenty American vessels, whose crews
were MURDERED!!

An additional gang of pirates was hung at the same period, at Porto
Rico.—Eleven at once.

[Illustration: Mutiny on board the Vineyard.       Page 284.]


  CHARLES GIBBS, _otherwise_ JAMES D. JEFFERS, AND THOMAS I. WANSLEY.

This atrocious villain was a native of Providence in Rhode-Island. His
true name was James D. Jeffers, but as he was more generally known as
Charles Gibbs we shall give him that appellation. His adventures,
excepting the crime for which he was finally hanged, are only known from
his own admissions while under sentence of death, and our readers must
judge for themselves how far they are to be credited.

It appears from evidence legally taken, that the brig Vineyard sailed
from New-Orleans about the first of November, eighteen hundred and
thirty, for Philadelphia. William Thornby was the master of the vessel,
and William Roberts the mate. The crew consisted of seven persons, viz.
Charles Gibbs, John Brownrigg, Robert Dawes, Henry Atwell, James Talbot,
A. Church, and Thomas I. Wansley, a young negro native of Delaware, who
acted as cook.

When the Vineyard had been five days at sea, Wansley made it known to
the crew that there were fifty thousand dollars in specie on board. This
information excited their cupidity, and induced them to consult on the
means of getting the money into their own hands. Many conversations took
place on the subject, and while these were going on, Dawes, who was a
mere boy, was sent to converse with the officers, in order to divert
their attention from what was passing. Finally it was _resolved_, that
as the master and mate were old men, it was time they should die and
make room for the rising generation. Moreover, they were of opinion that
as the mate was of a peevish disposition, he deserved death. Yet, to do
no man injustice, it does not appear that Brownrigg or Talbot had any
part in these deliberations, or in the foul deed that resulted from
them.

The conspirators agreed to commit the greatest earthly crimes, murder
and piracy, on the night of the twenty-third. The murder of the master
was assigned to Gibbs and Wansley; that of the mate to Atwell and
Church.

The vessel was off Cape Hatteras, when the time fixed for the murder
arrived. The master was standing on the quarter-deck, Dawes had the
helm, and Brownrigg was aloft. Dawes called Wansley aft to trim the
light in the binacle. The black moved as if to obey, but coming behind
Mr. Thornby, struck him on the back of the neck with the pump brake, so
that he fell forward, crying “murder!” Wansley repeated his blows till
the master was dead, and then, with the assistance of Gibbs, threw the
body overboard. While this deed of darkness was being done, the mate,
aroused by the noise, came up the companion ladder from the cabin.
Atwell and Church were waiting for him at the top of the ladder, and one
of them struck him down with a club; but the blow did not kill him.
Gibbs followed to complete the work, but not being able to find the mate
in the dark, returned to the deck for the binacle light. With this he
descended and laid hands on the victim, but was not able to overcome
him, even with the aid of Atwell; but finally, with the assistance of
Church, he was dragged on deck, beaten and thrown overboard. He was not
yet dead, and swam after the vessel four or five minutes, crying for
help, before he sank. All these transactions were witnessed by the boy
Dawes, who had a passive, if not an active part in them.

The pirates then took possession of the vessel, and Wansley busied
himself in wiping up the blood that had been spilled on deck, declaring,
with an oath, that though he had heard that the stains of the blood of a
murdered person could not be effaced, he would wipe away these. Then,
after drinking all round, they got up the money. It was distributed in
equal portions to all on board; Brownrigg and Talbot being assured that
if they would keep the secret, and share the plunder, they should
receive no injury.

They then steered a northeasterly course toward Long-Island, till they
came within fifteen or twenty miles of South-Hampton Light, where they
resolved to leave the vessel, in the boats, though the wind was blowing
hard. Atwell scuttled the brig and got into the jolly boat with Church
and Talbot, while Gibbs, Wansley, Dawes and Brownrigg, put off in the
long boat. The jolly boat swamped on a bar two miles from the shore, and
all on board were drowned. The long-boat was in great danger also, and
was only saved from a like fate by throwing over several bags of specie.
Nevertheless, the crew at last got on shore on Pelican Island, where
they buried their money, and found a sportsman who told them where they
were. They then crossed to Great Barn Island, and went to the house of a
Mr. Johnson, to whom Brownrigg gave the proper information. Thence they
went to the house of a Mr. Leonard, where they procured a wagon to carry
them farther. As they were about to get in, Brownrigg cried aloud that
they might go whither they pleased, but he would not accompany them, for
they were murderers. On hearing this Mr. Leonard sent for a magistrate,
and Gibbs and Dawes were apprehended. Wansley escaped into the woods,
but was followed and soon taken.

The evidence of the guilt of the prisoners was full and conclusive.
Their own confessions of the crime gratuitously made to Messrs. Meritt
and Stevenson, who had the custody of them from Flatbush to New-York,
could have left not the shadow of a doubt on the mind of any person who
heard the testimony of those officers. Wansley told the whole story,
occasionally prompted by Gibbs, and both admitted that Brownrigg was
innocent of any participation in their crimes. Their confession was not,
however, so favorable to Dawes.

Gibbs was arraigned for the murder of William Roberts, and Wansley for
that of William Thornby. They were both found guilty, and the district
attorney moved for judgment on the verdict. There was nothing peculiar
in their deportment during the trial. The iron visage of Gibbs was
occasionally darkened with a transient emotion, but he had evidently
abandoned all hope of escape, and sat the greater part of the time with
his hands between his knees, calmly surveying the scene before him.
Wansley was more agitated, and trembled visibly when he rose to hear the
verdict of the jury.

The judge proceeded to pass sentence on them severally, that each should
be taken from the place where they then were, and thence to the place of
confinement, and should be hanged by the neck till dead; and that the
marshal of the Southern District of New-York should see this sentence
carried into execution on the twenty-second day of April following,
between the hours of ten and four o’clock.

The first account which Gibbs gave of himself is, that his father
obtained a situation for him in the United States sloop of war Hornet,
Captain Lawrence, during the last war with England, in which vessel he
made two cruises; in the last of which she captured and sunk the enemy’s
sloop of war Peacock off the coast of Pernambuco, after an engagement of
twenty minutes. On the arrival of the Hornet in the United States,
Captain Lawrence was assigned by the government to the command of the
frigate Chesapeake, then lying in Boston harbor, and Gibbs accompanied
him to that ill-fated vessel in the month of April, eighteen hundred and
thirteen.

This statement of his services was proved to be false, and acknowledged
as such by himself. His motive for the falsehood was, to conceal his
real adventures about this time, that his proper name might not be
discovered. There is much to corroborate and nothing to disprove what
follows.

After his exchange, he abandoned all idea of following the sea for a
subsistence, went home to Rhode Island, and remained there a few months,
but being unable to conquer his propensity to roving, he entered on
board a ship bound to New-Orleans, and thence to Stockholm. On the
homeward passage they were compelled to put into Bristol, England, in
distress, where the ship was condemned, and he proceeded to Liverpool.
He returned to the United States in the ship Amity, Captain Maxwell.

After its arrival, he left the ship, and entered on board the Colombian
privateer Maria, Captain Bell. They cruised for about two months in the
Gulf of Mexico, around Cuba, but the crew becoming dissatisfied in
consequence of the non-payment of their prize-money, a mutiny arose, the
crew took possession of the schooner, and landed the officers near
Pensacola. A number of days elapsed before it was finally decided by
them what course to pursue. Some advised that they should cruise as
before, under the Colombian commission; others proposed to hoist the
black flag. They cruised for a short time without success, and it was
then unanimously determined to hoist the black flag and declare war
against all nations. At last one of the crew, named Antonio, suggested
that an arrangement could be made with a man in Havana, that would be
mutually beneficial; that he would receive all their goods, sell them,
and divide the proceeds. This suggestion being favorably received, they
ran up within two miles of Moro Castle, and sent Antonio on shore to see
the merchant and make a contract with him, which was done.

The Maria now put to sea, with a crew of about fifty men. The first
vessel she fell in with was the Indispensable, an English ship, bound to
Havana, which was taken and carried to Cape Antonio. The crew were
immediately destroyed: those who resisted were hewed to pieces: those
who offered no resistance, were reserved to be shot and thrown
overboard. Such was the manner in which they proceeded in all their
subsequent captures. The unhappy being that cried for mercy, in the hope
that something like humanity was to be found in the breasts even of the
worst of men, shared the same fate with him who resolved to sell his
life at the highest price. A French brig, with a valuable cargo of wine
and silk, was taken shortly after: the vessel was burnt and the crew
murdered.

The sanguinary scenes through which Gibbs had passed, now effectually
wrought up his desperation to the highest pitch, and being as remarkable
for his coolness and intrepidity as he was for his skill in navigation,
he was unanimously chosen to be their leader in all future enterprises.
To reap a golden harvest without the hazard of encountering living
witnesses of their crimes, it was unanimously resolved to spare no
lives, and to burn and plunder without mercy. They knew that the
principle inculcated by the old maxim that “dead men tell no tales,” was
the safe one for them, and they scrupulously followed it. Gibbs states
that he never had occasion to give orders to begin the work of death.

He now directed his course towards the Bahama Banks, where they captured
a brig, believed to be the William of New-York, from some port in
Mexico, with a cargo of furniture, destroyed the crew, took her to Cape
Antonio, and sent the furniture and other articles to their friend in
Havana. Sometime during this cruise, the pirate was chased for nearly a
whole day by a United States ship, supposed to be the John Adams; he
hoisted Patriot colors, and finally escaped. In the early part of the
summer of eighteen hundred and seventeen, they took the Earl of Moira,
an English ship from London, with a cargo of dry goods. The crew were
destroyed, the vessel burnt, and the goods carried to the Cape. There
they had a settlement with their Havana friend, and the proceeds were
divided according to agreement.

During the cruise which was made in the latter part of eighteen hundred
and seventeen, and the beginning of eighteen hundred and eighteen, a
Dutch ship from Curacoa was captured, with a cargo of West-India goods,
and a quantity of silver plate. The passengers and crew, to the number
of thirty, were all destroyed, with the exception of a young female
about seventeen, who fell upon her knees and implored Gibbs to save her
life. The appeal was successful, and he promised to save her, though he
knew it would lead to dangerous consequences among his crew. She was
carried to Cape Antonio, and kept there about two months; but the
dissatisfaction increased until it broke out at last into open mutiny,
and one of the pirates was shot by Gibbs for daring to lay hold of her
with a view of beating out her brains. Gibbs was compelled in the end to
submit her fate to a council of war, at which it was decided that the
preservation of their own lives made her sacrifice indispensable. He
therefore acquiesced in the decision, and gave orders to have her
destroyed by poison, which was immediately done.

The piratical schooner was shortly after driven ashore near the Cape,
and so much damaged that it was found necessary to destroy her. A new
sharp-built schooner was in consequence provided by their faithful
friend in Havana, called the Picciana, and despatched to their
rendezvous. In this vessel they cruised successfully for more than four
years. Among the vessels taken and destroyed with their crews, were the
Belvidere, Dido, a Dutch brig, the British barque Larch, the other
vessels enumerated in the list furnished to Justice Hopson, and many
others whose names are not recollected. They had a very narrow escape,
at one time, from the English man-of-war brig Coronation. In the early
part of October, eighteen hundred and twenty one, they captured a ship
from Charleston, took her to Cape Antonio, and were busily engaged in
landing her cargo, when the United States brig Enterprise, Captain
Kearney, hove in sight, and discovering their vessels at anchor, sent in
her barges to attack them. A serious engagement followed; they defended
themselves for some time behind a four gun battery, but in the end were
defeated with considerable loss, and compelled to abandon their vessels
and booty, and fly to the mountains for safety.

They left hot poisoned coffee on the cabin table, in hopes that some of
the American officers would drink it. This statement is confirmed by
Captain Kearney.

On Friday, April twenty-second, 1831, Gibbs and Wansley paid the penalty
of their crimes. Both prisoners arrived at the gallows about twelve
o’clock, accompanied by the marshal, his aids, and some twenty or thirty
United States marines. Two clergymen attended them to the fatal spot,
where every thing being in readiness, and the ropes adjusted about their
necks, the throne of mercy was fervently addressed in their behalf.
Wansley then prayed earnestly himself, and afterwards joined in singing
a hymn.

The boy Dawes was not prosecuted, having been received as State’s
evidence against Gibbs and Wansley.


                     PIRACIES ON THE BRIG MEXICAN.

On the 26th day of August, 1834, His Britannic Majesty’s brig of war
Savage, from Portsmouth, England, arrived at Salem, Massachusetts,
having on board sixteen of the crew of the piratical schooner Panda,
which robbed the brig Mexican, of Salem, on the high seas, nearly two
years since.

The robbery committed upon the Mexican was one of the most audacious and
cruel acts of piracy ever recorded. She was bound to Rio Janeiro from
Salem; and was boarded by a piratical schooner under Brazilian colors,
on the 20th of September, 1832, lat. 33, long. 34, 30, and robbed of
twenty thousand dollars in specie, the officers and crew stripped of
every thing valuable, and fastened below, and the vessel set on fire
with the horrid intention of destroying her with all on board. Captain
Butman and his men succeeded in getting on deck through the scuttle
which the pirates had left unsecured, and extinguished the flames, and
returned home. Our government ordered a vessel to cruise in pursuit, but
she gave up the chase as hopeless. The piratical vessel was afterwards
taken on the coast of Africa, by His Britannic Majesty’s brig Curlew,
and destroyed, under the following circumstances:

The Curlew arrived at St. Thomas, west coast of Africa, from India, with
orders to cruise on that coast; and her commander having obtained
information that a schooner, suspected to be a pirate, was lying in the
river Nazareth, on the southern extremity of the coast, immediately
sailed in pursuit, and found the schooner as described. The boats of the
Curlew were manned to take possession of her, when the crew of the
schooner fled to the shore, with the exception of four who were taken
prisoners. They had kindled a fire to destroy the schooner, and she had
been stripped of every thing valuable. The fire was extinguished without
damage. She had no cargo on board, but her water casks were all filled,
and she was apparently ready for another cruise. In her cabin were found
a compass, marked Boston, the flags and ensigns of different nations,
and custom-house papers made out at Havana. In taking her down the
river, she accidentally blew up, and the Curlew’s purser and one man
were killed. The four men taken were shipped at St. Thomas after the
robbery of the Mexican. The Curlew’s crew pursued the fugitives in
various directions, and succeeded in capturing an additional number of
the pirates; and several natives’ towns were burned by the Curlew’s men.
The pirates had an examination in England before the proper authorities,
when five of them offered to turn king’s evidence, two of whom were
admitted to testify. They were fully committed, and the British
government ordered them to this country for trial, and the affidavits
and documents relative to their capture and subsequent confinement and
examination were delivered to the authorities in this country.

The pirates were tried before the United States court at Boston,
November 11th, 1834, which continued for fourteen days, and resulted in
the conviction of seven of their number, five of whom were executed
agreeably to their sentence, the other two received a reprieve from the
President of the United States.

_Execution of the Spanish Pirates._—[Thursday, June 11, 1835.]—Pursuant
to previous arrangement, Captain Don Pedro Gibert, and Juan Montenegro,
Manuel Castillo, Angel Garcia, and Manuel Boyga, were yesterday morning
summoned to prepare for their immediate execution, agreeably to their
sentence, for having, while belonging to the schooner Panda, committed
piracy, by robbing the brig Mexican, of Salem, of twenty thousand
dollars, and afterwards attempting to destroy the crew and all evidence
of their crime, by setting fire to the vessel. It is understood, that,
when the prisoners became thoroughly convinced that there was no longer
any grounds to hope for a further respite, they entered into a mutual
agreement to commit suicide on Wednesday night. Angel Garcia made the
first attempt, in the evening, by trying to open the veins in each arm,
with a fragment of a bottle, but was discovered before he could effect
his purpose, and a stricter guard was afterwards maintained upon all of
them during the remainder of the night, and every thing removed with
which they might be supposed to renew any attempt upon their own lives.
Yesterday morning, however, about nine o’clock, while the avenues of the
jail resounded with the heavy steps of a host of acting marshals, and
the “busy note of preparation” struck solemnly upon the ears of the
spectators within reach of its echo, Boyga succeeded in inflicting a
deep gash on the left side of his neck with a piece of tin. The
officer’s eye had been withdrawn from him scarcely a minute, before he
was discovered lying on his pallet, with a peculiar trembling of his
knees, which induced the officers to examine if any thing had suddenly
happened to him. They found him covered with blood, and nearly
insensible; medical aid was at hand, and the wound was immediately sewed
up, but Boyga, who had fainted from loss of blood, never revived again.
Two Catholic clergymen, the Rev. Mr. Varella, a Spanish gentleman, and
pastor of the Spanish congregation at New-York, and the Rev. Mr. Curtin,
of this city, were in close attendance upon the prisoners during the
whole morning; and at a quarter past ten, under the escort of the
Marshal and his deputies, accompanied them to the gallows, erected on an
insulated angle of land in the rear of the jail.

When the procession arrived at the foot of the ladder leading up to the
platform of the gallows, the Rev. Mr. Varella, looking directly at
Captain Gibert, said—“Spaniards, ascend to heaven.” Gibert mounted with
a quick step, and was followed by his comrades at a more moderate pace,
but without the least perceptible indication of hesitancy. Boyga,
unconscious of his situation and destiny, was carried up in a chair, and
seated beneath the rope prepared for him. Gibert, Montenegro, Garcia,
and Castillo all smiled subduedly as they took their appointed stations
on the platform. Judging only from Gibert’s air, carriage, and
unembarrassed eye, as he glanced at the surrounding multitude, and
surveyed the mechanism of his shameful death, he might have well been
mistaken for an officer in attendance, instead of one of the doomed.
With the exception of repeating his prayers, after the clergyman, he
spoke but little. Soon after he ascertained his position on the stage,
he left it, and passing over to the spot where the apparently lifeless
Boyga was seated on the chair, he bent over his shoulder and kissed him
very affectionately. He then resumed his station, but occasionally
turned round to Mr. Peyton the interpreter, and the clergymen.
Addressing his followers, he said—“Boys, we are going to die; but let us
be firm, for we are innocent.” To Mr. Peyton, removing his linen collar,
and handing it to him, he said—“This is all I have to part with—take it
as a keepsake. I die innocent, but I’ll die like a noble Spaniard. Good
bye, brother, we die in the hope of meeting you in heaven.” Montenegro
and Garcia, though exhibiting no terror, vociferated their innocence,
exclaiming—“Americans, we are not _culpable_—we are innocent; but we
forgive all who have injured us.” Castillo addressed himself to an
individual, whom he recognised in the front rank of the officers below
the stage, and said—“Adieu, my friend—I shall see you in heaven—I do not
care so much about dying, as to have the Americans think I am guilty,”
[culpable.] All of them expressed great satisfaction at the intelligence
of De Soto’s reprieve.

The Marshal having read the warrant for their execution, and stated that
De Soto was respited for sixty days, and Ruiz for thirty, the ropes were
adjusted round the necks of the prisoners, and a slight hectic flush
spread over the countenance of each; but not an eye quailed, nor a limb
trembled, nor a muscle quivered. As the cap was about to be drawn over
Gibert’s face, the Spanish Priest fervently embraced him, and during the
operation of covering the faces of the others, the Rev. Mr. Curtin
advanced to the railing of the stage, and read a brief declaration on
behalf of the prisoners, addressed to the citizens of America assembled,
setting forth, that as at the trial they had declared their innocence,
so did they now continue to do so. Boyga’s cap and rope were adjusted,
as he sat, supported by an officer, in the chair, which was so placed as
to fall with the drop. At a quarter before 11, after every preparation
was completed, and while they were repeating to themselves, in scarcely
audible tones, their prayers, Deputy Marshal Bass suddenly cut the small
cord which restrained the spring, and the platform fell without even the
creaking of a hinge. In falling, Boyga’s chair struck against the bodies
of the Captain and Garcia. Boyga struggled slightly once after his
descent, and Montenegro and Castillo but little; Capt. Gibert did not
die quite so easily, the rope being placed behind his neck. Garcia
struggled most and longest—about 3 minutes. After being suspended 30
minutes, the physicians in attendance pronounced them dead, and they
were cut down, and placed in black coffins, in readiness in the yard.

It is stated in many of the papers, that Captain Gibert attempted to cut
his throat on Wednesday night, but this is not the fact. It is true that
he pursued a line of conduct on that night which induced the officers to
suspect that he intended to commit suicide. Mr. Tavers, one of the
guards, who understands the Spanish language, overheard the signal
agreed upon, by the whole party. The Captain proposed to write till one
o’clock, when he was to bid “Good bye” to the rest, and they were then
to despatch themselves with pieces of glass. Accordingly, at the
appointed hour, the Captain, having terminated his writing, destroyed a
part of his papers, retired to a corner of his cell, and appeared to be
arranging his person to “die with dignity;” but being closely watched at
the window, the officers, Messrs. Shute and Pierce, entered his cell
before he had completed his toilet. They asked him what he intended to
do; but he was irritated by their undesired intrusion, and, showing
temper, declined answering. Upon searching, they found a piece of glass
in his pocket. They then ironed him, with his hands behind his back. He
remained dogged in his disposition, and blew the light out four times,
which the officer as often re-lighted, and threatened to put his legs in
irons if he persisted in putting it out.

Montenegro, it was discovered, _after_ his execution, had cut his throat
in two places, and had bled very profusely, but had washed his shirt out
in the morning to conceal the attempt. It was the irritation of the
wounds, probably, that made him hold his head a little awry when the
rope was first put round his neck. He was one of the most piratical
looking of the crew, but one of the most innocent, and was always in
pleasant humor. Garcia inflicted wounds upon his arms after he was
ironed.

DYING DECLARATION OF THE PIRATES.—The Catholic Sentinel of Saturday
contains the following declaration of innocence, written in Spanish by
Capt. Gibert, and signed by his companions. The substance of it was
delivered from the platform, a few minutes before their execution, by
the Rev. Mr. Curtin, one of the Catholic clergymen in attendance:—

“Americans! we, the undersigned, were reduced to this sad and
ignominious fate by misfortune, not by guilt. In this world we have
nothing to hope; but in the next, we confidently expect salvation from
the benign mercy of our heavenly Redeemer. Then, Americans, we declare
to you with our dying breath, that we are innocent; and we now aver so
in the hearing of that God before whom we must in a few moments
appear;—but our souls will not, at that sacred tribunal, be charged with
debasing the last act of our lives by the utterance of falsehood. We
speak the solemn truth;—we are not culpable,—and we reiterate here,
under the gallows, what we declared on our trial, ‘_that we die innocent
men_.’ May God forgive those who brought us to this fatal end, as we
leave the world in peace with all men. Farewell, Americans.

                          _Angel Garcia_,
                          _Juan Montenegro_,
                          _Pedro Gibert_,
                          _Manuel Boyga_,
                          _Manuel Castillo_.”




------------------------------------------------------------------------




Transcriber’s note:

 1. Added CONTENTS.

 2. Changed “sent him volunteer” to “sent him to volunteer” on p. 5.

 3. Changed “ship was as Marseilles” to “ship was at Marseilles” on
      p. 5.
 4. Changed “profit not pleasure” to “profit nor pleasure” on p. 29.

 5. Changed “where acquitted” to “were acquitted” on p. 68.

 6. Changed “were they were” to “where they were” on p. 83.

 7. Changed “provisions, which is” to “provisions, which are” on p. 107.

 8. Changed “good artist” to “good an artist” on p. 140.

 9. Changed “white men such” to “white men much” on p. 169.

10. Changed “men of war lie” to “men of war lay” on p. 186.

11. Changed “were was kept” to “where was kept” on p. 204.

12. Changed “to Madagascar, were” to “to Madagascar, where” on p. 216.

13. Silently corrected typographical errors.

14. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE LIVES AND BLOODY
EXPLOITS OF THE MOST NOTED PIRATES; THEIR TRIALS AND EXECUTIONS***


******* This file should be named 54951-0.txt or 54951-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/4/9/5/54951


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

